>> Hi, everyone.  Thanks so much
for having me here today.  You
can see that the subject is
informing without alienating.  I
want to talk about why it's so
important not to alienate
people.
When you're in a room like this,
it's easy to talk a common
language, and the temptation to
forget some of the people are
outside of the room and might
understand these beautiful and
technical visualizations.  But
my talk as a journalist is to
make sure that what I do makes
sense to as many people as
possible.  And the
information -- but it's
something I think is very
important.
So I wanted to start out with
the one thing, which is I'm sure
pretty much everyone here has
made at least one -- some of you
have made hundreds and hundreds,
but how many times have you been
in the data set you're
visualizing?  And this is
something I have thought about
for a really long time.  In 2010
I started working for the
statistics department at the
organization migration, I was
working on trying to keep track
of how many families became
refugees as a result of the war
in Iraq, and how many were
displaced in the country.  But
more important than simply
counting how many families there
were, I was trying to understand
whether they needed water, an
education, feed, what they
needed to stay alive.
But the statistics served a
second purpose, we can go and
say this is the money we need to
provide for those Iraqis.
And I have a really, really
important part of this, I was
really, really bad at my job.
That's not me being modest as
all.  And you can look at this
chart.  Which proves it.  It
comes from one of the reports
that we published.  And I have
some big issues with it.
Surprisingly, the thing that
bothers me is not the fact it's
an ugly pie chart.  Think about
the people outside of this room,
and it's charts like this people
are producing in classrooms and
offices.  The fact it's 3D, it's
not great, it's misleading and
other things that are
problematic and explain why it
was I was so bad at my job.  And
the first of those is simple
geography.  So I was based in
Iraq.  Like so many
organizations at the time, we
were based in Jordan because the
situation in Iraq was so, so
bad.  And I think the
geographical separation from the
data is super important and
really easy for tows forget
about it.  It meant I couldn't
look at some of the results.  I
noticed there was electricity
problems in one part of the
country.  Without being there,
it's hard to understand whether
they are because of the
short-term outage, or systemic
within the country.  Or whether,
in fact, actually people just
misunderstood the question put
to them.  And we're talking
about electrical products as
opposed to electricity.
So that geography was a big, big
problem for me.  There's another
reason I have a big problem with
this chart.  If you remove the
labels, I could be depicting
absolutely anything.  I could be
showing the types of underwear
that women wear, murder weapons,
because the visualization is so
divorced from the subject
itself.  And the idea of
communicating something personal
about the data might feel
alien -- this is a cheesy
transition.  Speaking of aliens,
this is Lieutenant Commander
Data from Star Trek.  And I'm a
Star Trek fan.  Data is smart.
He can compute just about
everything.  That's why he was
such an asset to the captain.
He don't understand human.  In
season one, episode 13, his
identical twin shows up.  And he
is an upgrade on data, he has
the emotion chip that Data
doesn't have.  While Data is
super virtuous, the other is
manipulative and self-serving.
That reflects how a lot of
people think about data.  It's
emotional-less and it's good for
that reason.
And that's kind of problematic
for us, very often people
working with data don't have the
incentive to correct people.
It's great thing we're perfect
humans doing this with no input
and no biases.  But it's
important to be honest and
upfront about what we do.  And
there's the data individuals,
any visualization is by a human.
We must acknowledge that, we
make decisions about colors and
scale all the time.
Reason number three I was bad at
my job is I think the most
important reason.  Which is the
charts I was making were being
shown to a couple dozen people,
sometimes a hundred.  Mostly
donors and colleagues.  And not
seen by the Iraqis.  The Iraqis
provided the data, but weren't
given any kind of mechanism to
say, hang on a second, you have
that wrong.  And I think this
happens all the time.  One
aspect of this that was report
was 8 megabytes in side, it was
huge.  And download speeds are
not the same around the world.
And the fact is that some Iraqis
would have had to have waited
for ages and ages in front of
their screens to have simply
downloaded the thing.  And even
just the Iraqis that were
speaking English.  Some of the
reports were translated into
Arabic.  Not all were.  I can
understand that, it was a
difficult environment, and the
people seeing it needed the
money to give to us.  And we
weren't being transparent about
the limitations of the data and
the visualization, or the
people, us, putting this stuff
together.
You can't see my process here,
can't see if it's collected from
questionnaires or face-to-face
interviews.  You can't see how
many people I'm depicting.  It's
a failure.  And the simple fact
this didn't give the Iraqis the
opportunity to say you got to
wrong.  And that's super-ironic,
the people you are visualizing,
saying they're disempowered, and
not giving them to the
opportunity say you're wrong.
It was an intense experience.
And I was bad at my job.  And I
don't like being bad at my job.
In 2012 I decided to go to Iraq
to see if I got the numbers
right.
And it just -- it was pretty
intense because I realized how
little my charts were really,
really communicating the
reality.  They were completely
out of touch.  And so it was a
way of capturing something that
felt less abstract.  I started
to take photographs that felt
more real to me of what life was
like there.  And I started to
take photographs all the time,
hundreds and hundreds of them.
And this kind of process of
repetition meant I started to
notice patterns in some of these
photographs and noticing
patterns makes you want to
visualize data.
Eventually I turned these into
charts in the process.  And I
turned them into charts and
produced an exhibition of the
photographic images in 2013.  So
I'm just going to talk you
through a couple of the visuals
that I made in case they're
interesting.
This was a woman just kind of
walking down the street in
Baghdad.  And I turned it into a
bar chart.  And what I'm
displaying here is the
proportion of women 18 to 59
that think a husband has a
justification for striking his
wife.  And the terminology is
bizarre, but that's the way the
question was worded.  It was
easy to forget the cultural
differences.  In Iraq, asking
people, have you been abused by
your husband is a massive
intrusion into the private life.
The data we're going to get is
going to be incredibly,
incredibly fluid.  You have to
be creative how you understand
trends.  This comes from the
Iraqi census.
And as you can see, one in five
women think that a husband has
ha justification for striking
his wife if she burns the food.
Like really, really shocking
data.  But I just wanted to
remember some of the actual
people behind the data, and
using photographs was important
in order to do that.
Similarly, this one is just some
Iraqis in the north of Iraq.  I
actually -- anyone have a guess
of what it is I'm visualizing
here?  See the line at the top?
Sorry?  No, that would have been
a better thing to visualize with
this particular image.  It's
actually -- it's actually
depicting foreign aid.  So it's
quite useful for kind of seeing
how the country was quickly -- I
wouldn't say forgotten, but some
of that financial aid trailed
off.  And the electricity, it
was running out of the financial
aid at that time.
This one here shows because
working for the migration
organization, I was focusing on
the number of refugees, the
number of people internally
displaced in the country, as
well as refugees who had kind of
come back to Iraq.  And again,
the idea of this was to remind
people that this data is humans
and fix it in a geographic
landscape of Iraq.
This one was -- I actually was
helping someone who wanted to
write a will.  And in Iraq you
kind of -- you go to these
people out in the street.  This
was like a guy under an
umbrella.  You get a form from
him and go a mile down the road
to get a stamp from another guy.
They don't publish in the papers
anymore, but explains the number
of steps for a contract.  And I
want you to visualize it this
way, it was a bureaucratic
nightmare to get anything done.
And each one of these steps
creates an opportunity for
corruption.  The corruption in
the country is relevant to the
statistics we are looking at and
so easy to forgot.  Before I
went there, I was looking at
education statistics all the
time.
Things like the percent of
Iraqis that graduated from high
school, literacy rates, thing
like that.  While I was there, I
talked to a mother who explained
her daughter was falling behind
in school, not because she
necessarily wasn't doing well,
but even the teachers accepted
bribes to give better grades.  I
could look at the data set of
the school grades to not
understand the way that it was
distorted by facts on the
ground.
So it helped me to understand
the way that I wasn't -- the
kind of missing gaps in the
things I was looking at.  This
was an attempt to do a better
pie chart.  I'm not claiming
that any of these are good.  I
look back with the benefit of
hindsight and think they're bad
in lots to of ways.  But this
showed that nine out of every
100 Iraqis, the cause of death
was suspected torture.  And you
couldn't look at the
visualization and lose sight of
the people in it, the human side
of things.
And even if you read the labels,
get a sense of subject, in a
real time in a real place.  And
the other purpose of these
charts is they're supposed to be
very inclusive.  The process,
someone selected -- I
think, and it looks like a real
color.  So hopefully people
could see a way they could
replicate my process.  And I
think that's really, really
important.  I do not think that
data visualization is for geeks,
I don't describe myself as a
geek, and I don't like the label
of a geek, it creates insiders
that can be exclusionary.  I
want people to look at my work,
as many as possible.  That's the
reason I moved into journalism.
And I am not ashamed that I seek
out and want a lot of readers.
They can check my work and tell
me whether or not I'm getting
things right.
So I started working out with
the Guardian's data block, and
this tone FiveThirtyEight in the
U.S.  And I started writing a
column called am I normal?  The
name eventually switched.  It
sounded like we were placing
something on the readers by
providing a response to the
questions?
The idea was that, A, I could
not only get more input
visualizations, but the
questions that I should be
asking, what kind of hypotheses.
And I wanted to talk about one
of these for a different site.
I got a question for Caroline,
living in Philadelphia at the
time.  And she wrote to me and
asked, dear Mona, I read an
article that said most of the
prison population is religious.
There are few atheists in
prison.  Please tell me if that
is true for the United States.
As many journalists do, I found
the data and visualized it with
FiveThirtyEight.  What's the
best way to visualize this?
Should we be showing more
numbers and we were really
interested in ratios.  What was
underrepresented in prison
relative to the U.S. prison
population.  And you can see
Christians underrepresented,
more in prison relative to the
population as a whole, and
Jewish inmates as well.  So I
published this data, and as I
always do at the end of the
columns, invited readers to get
in touch.  I did, I had former
inmates who get in touch that
explain that part of the reason
for this data is that if you are
in prison, as these individuals
had been, sometimes you get
access to better meals as
opposed to standard prison
meals.  I had it explained that
you could get extra recreational
time, gets you out of your cell
which is important if you're in
the prison for 23 hours a day.
So the ability for people to
explain the why is important.
The theories, not that I'm not
going to accept the anecdotes,
but it's new lines of inquiry.
My job is not working if I'm not
relentlessly looking at what
rather than what is happening.
My inbox is really, really
important to me.  I'm going to
share some of the questions I
have in the inbox.  They are
quite interesting.  They reveal,
again, some of the things the
general public are thinking --
is thinking about data.
So this one which was sent to me
in 2015, to attractive people
have more sex than ugly people.
I could imagine together, they
did really well and people
accepting that data on face
value without any kind of
interrogation of what is meant
by attractive and ugly.
And I think the need to take a
step back and explain the
definition of terms and the
methodology of the way you're
collecting this stuff is super
important.
Here's another one.  Am I the
only one that doesn't use the
designed opening in my underwear
when peeing.  This was
interesting.  I assume it came
from a man.  As someone without
a penis, I didn't think this was
interesting at all.  But I
shared it on social media.  And
a lot of people think this is
interesting.  Which is quite
nice.  Because what I find
interesting isn't necessarily
the same topics as the people I
should be serving.  So to be
able to check that is super
important.
And this one is quite dark.  So
someone asked me asked what the
auto-erotic asphyxiation success
rate was, and looking for a good
answer.  I'm sure it's performed
successfully a lot of times,
right?  You are looking for
reassurance.  But it got me
thinking critically about your
responsibilities as a
journalist.  Let's say I was
able to collect the data and the
data showed that 90% of the time
you're fine.  You're totally
fine.  How can I put that into a
chart that communicates risk to
a reader in a really, really
responsible manner so people
don't just see that chart and do
something that is potentially
quite dangerous to them.
And with a health report, these
questions are critical.  You
could be shaping kind of
people's choices.  And then this
really simple one.  This last
one leads to me the last of my
very strange kind of annotated,
somewhat narcissistic resume,
the thing I'm describing, but I
want to talk about the iteration
in the way I have tried to think
about data visualization.  As
you can see from the messages,
FiveThirtyEight readers are
special.  This happens around
most Websites.  The Internet
doesn't create a perfect flat
space.  You get clusters and
community, The Guardian reader,
not necessarily the same as a
FiveThirtyEight reader.  I
wanted to publish on something
that was a little more flat and
help give me access to
audiences.  And I want to resist
the urge to produce interactives
all the time.  I was starting to
do that.  And I wasn't thinking
critically when I needed to ask
the reader to get involved and
when to give them the simple
image and kind of the more
simplistic story.

9:30:53
So I started to basically use
Instagram.  I thought it was a
good way as well -- the images
are really fantastic.  They're
transparent and gives them an
opportunity to have a discussion
and a debate around that
visualization.  So here's one I
do, which was a response to a
particular question.  How much
pee is a lot of pee?  I tried to
use everyday objects whenever I
can in order to have the scale.
That's super important.  Not
everyone necessarily uses the
same units of measurement, they
are different.  And especially
with large units, it's really
hard to understand what we're
talking about.  Pretty much
everybody has had a one liter
bottle in their hands and they
can understand it.
This is another one, and kind of
don't think I need my hand in
it.  Makes it look like a mini
basketball.  But it's to show
the relative size of the
basketball.  And the hoop, this
is about scale.  So contrasting
the average parking space in
America with the average
confinement cell.  And I got
online abuse from both sides of
the spectrum.  Abuse from people
who say you are implying they
have too much space, and abuse
from those implying they have
too little space.  Which bodes
well with the way you visualize
something.
And I wanted to use this as a
way to reach out to the
community of non-Geeks,
and say information is
relevant.  There was a
journalist in New York that do a
freedom of information act
request to find out how much
decapitated animals there were
in New York parks.  I was able
to visualize this and which ones
were the most commonly found
animals.  Headless chicks, over
a ten year time period, but
interesting.  Not always just
heads.  But sometimes the bodies
and not the heads.  It was super
interesting and I got people
thinking about why this data is
the way it is.  And we -- for me
it was a good thing.  And then
the benefits of having -- before
finishing, I want to talk about
some examples of what I think
are good data journalism on my
own.  And good visualizations.
So, again, I want to come back
to the idea of conveying what we
do, the fallibility of what we
do.  And I want to focus on one
very, very small data set in a
way.  So this comes from this
block that some of you know
called the quantified breakup.
And it was written by a woman
going through a divorce in New
York.  And she visualized all
kinds of aspects of the breakup.
Visualized the messages, the
frequency, the time of day, and
how the relationship fizzled
out.  Visualized how much sleep,
and times she just started
crying in public and couldn't
control herself.  People loved
it, not just because it told a
story, but because it was
really, really honest in terms
of the limitations.  This wasn't
one woman trying to claim she
was trying to represent divorce
in America or New York or women
in general.  She was saying here
is the story, my data.  And the
transparency is very great.
This is a very different
example.  This was from the New
York Times.  Done by Gregor
Aisch, Kevin Quealy, and Amanda
Cox.  And this chart -- the
parent's income versus the
likelihood that their children
will attend college.  Draw out
the data and how it compares.
Tells you a story and inspires
you in a way that feels super,
super inclusive.  And you can
see how you compare to other
people.
Again, it's just really, really
friendly and it just had great
design.
And then the last one I want to
talk about is early this month
The Guardian published what I
thought was a good analysis of
17 million comments published on
the Website.  One reason why it
was really, really good is that
it didn't overwhelm the viewer
in terms of too much data.  It
broke it down into several
slices to you could see how
levels of abuse varied by gender
and subject area.  But what was
good, I think, it allowed the
reader to kind of take part in a
little quiz where you could read
a real comment that was on the
site and decide for yourself
whether you would block it,
define as abuse or left it up.
What it did, it was, A, a sense
of scale, you took a minute or
two to decide if it was abusive.
And 17 million have been
analyzed, that's a lot.  And
shows you that even though you
can read in all of this what was
truly objective data looking at
the scale of abuse, once you
read that comment, you realize
that every one of the data
points represents a small human
decision.  Whether or not this
is abuse.  It's based purely on
subjectivity.  Even the whole
appears objective.  And is
objective in some ways.
So I thought that was really,
really smart.  Now I know I
touched on a lot of disparate
topics.  So I would like to
close with some ways we can get
better at what it is we are
doing.  Even though data
visualization has obviously made
leaps and bounds and has
progressed hugely, in some ways
our data literacy hasn't and
never will.  We're kind of
flawed human beings.  If I was
to ask how many people are in
the auditorium, we would get
very different response on
range.  And the bigger -- if
you're in a huge concert venue,
it's hard to guesstimate.  You
have the opportunity to
community scale to readers in
much better ways.
So even something as simple as
17 million comments, trying to
help people to understand how
many that actually represents.
And there's all the kinds of
simple and complicated ways of
doing that.  But I think it's
important as a goal to kind of
bear in mind.  The other thing
that I think is super important,
if I haven't made it kind of
clear already is, is the
conversation.  So I think kind
of communicating, interacting
with people makes me so much
better at what I do.  Gawker
used to let you leave comments
on the photograph.  And you
could see where they clustered
together to have the
conversation.  You could see the
people were more interested in
the President of the United
States, or the wealthy
2-year-old child.  And
translated into a chart where
people left comments, it would
be incredibly powerful.  You
could see, if everyone is having
a conversation about one year in
the data on a line chart, or
whether everyone is focused on
one state in America.  Or
whether everyone is talking
about one dot, scatterplot,
maybe a point of inaccuracy in
your data and you can change it.
And it's more focused and more
fruitful as a decision.
That's all I was going to say
about Obama and the child.  The
last thing that's really
important, question just get
better at communicating
uncertainty.  That was the idea
of doing hand drawings and
photographs.  It was about
admitting fallibility better.  I
think some data visualizations
communicate in a way that I find
slightly troubling.  There's
ways to communicate uncertainty,
plotting out things around an
average, or plotting out
probabilities, we need to think
more critically about it.
So the last thing I would say is
that, you know, yes, data should
strive for objectivity and
fairness, and visualizations
keep trying to do that, but
shouldn't be alienating people,
but we may jeopardize the
quality of what we're doing.  It
doesn't solve everything, you
have access to a whole lot of
people, but reach out and
publish in the same language as
them.  That they are available
to you regardless of Internet
speeds.  And we, you know, in a
very, very concrete way we're
actually unelected officials who
are kind of representing people
in our data.  If we're not
checking in on them to say, have
we got this right?  I think
there's something pretty dark
about that.  Thank you very
much.  Thank you.
