>> Okay.  So the first thing I
will do is turn on the
microphone.  And the second
thing I should do, figure out
how to put an image on the
screen.  Because that's how we
show data visualization.  Okay.
So the next thing -- to this
one.  Do that.  Okay.
Okay.
>> Make sure you confirm.
>> Oopsy.  Confirm.  All right.
So now I switch back to this --
is it on?  Okay.  Where is it?
Might have to -- I don't want to
mirror, actually.  So let's see.
Where is my other window?  This
window.  Ta-da.
View.  Hide tool bar, full
screen.  Great!  Awesome.  Okay.
So my name is Tony.  As -- thank
you, Irene, for the
introduction.  So I'm a
designer.  I came to kind of
visualization from a point of
view of how do you kind of
communicate?  How do you
communicate ideas?  How do you
communicate concepts to people?
I really care about explaining
things to people.  I really care
about, as Nicky was saying,
informing people.  This is a
distillation of some of the
lessons I've learned over the
last couple of years.  Building
data visualizations that are
expositions for ideas.  And the
techniques that I'm bringing in
from kind of graphic design and
motion design.
That's why this talk is called
Animation, Pacing, and
Exposition.  A lot of it is
going to be based on examples
from this project that I did
last year.  Called R2D3.  This
project was about machine
learning.  A lot of those things
that the Google folks talked
about this morning.
I kind of toned it down, very
simple, something that's very --
one of the simplest machine
models you can have.  Really
break it down in how they
explain it.  So I'm going to
talk about how you actually view
that from a designer's
perspective.
And so I'm going to go over
three things.  Three things,
actually.  So the goal -- the
goal is exposition.  And
explaining something.  What are
we dealing with in terms of
constraints?  What are we
dealing with in terms was how we
do this?  I will argue that the
most important constraint you're
dealing with is not screen size,
it's not color, it's not time,
it is not the amount of
information you're dealing with,
it's attention.  And speaking as
the last speaker between you and
your drinks, I recognize that
attention is something that I
have to deal with right now.
So let's move on.
So I'm going to talk about two
tactics.  Tactics for data, how
to manage the attention.  And a
lot of that is animation, and
it's about pacing.  But let me
first start with the idea of
what is exposition?  I think of
exposition -- there's lots of
ways to think about it.  I have
the idea in my head, I'm going
to try to reconstruct it in your
head.  How do I do that?  How do
I reconstruct an idea from my
head to your head?  I have to
establish a channel to move
stuff between my head and your
head.  Right now I'm doing that
through sound.  There's a
microphone.  I'm doing that with
illustrations on the screen.
But more importantly, though,
I'm using your attention.  I am
gathering your attention and I'm
trying to like push things
through so that you guys are
receiving stuff that I think is
important.
So let's talk about attention.
What is attention?  So the
dictionary deaf nation --
here -- is the mental faculty of
considering or taking notice of
something.
From a kind of a science and
psychology point of view,
attention is really about how
your brain is taking in tons and
tons of information right now.
Every one of you have eyes that
take in more information than
like I think -- has more
bandwidth than Wi-Fi.  You are
constantly doing that.  Your
brain is doing the act of
filtering all that stuff.
Discarding what is irrelevant,
and focusing it on something
that is relevant.  And that
process of filtering shit out is
attention.
When I'm doing the work of
filtering things out, that's
paying attention.  And from a
designer's point of view, I
think about dealing with two
kinds of tension.  The first one
is one I have hinted at, which
is visual attention.  Your eyes
can take in a lot of information
at once, but, like, still have a
sense of kind of directionality.
You have to -- I'm looking over
here, I can't really see what's
over here.  When I'm looking
over mere, I can't see you guys,
all right?
And so if you can design
something that helps guide the
eye to the thing that is
relevant, you're saving
attention.  You're like not
making the eye work harder than
necessary.  The second kind of
attention is, well, kind of
attention.  It's short-term
memory.  Our conscious minds can
really only deal with a few bits
at once.  Our brain can deal
with a lot more information.
And so you have to consider at
any given time you can -- if you
can only fit so many things in
short-term memory, you have to
be very careful about what you
put -- what you put in that
short-term memory.  It's like
RAM.  What do you put in there
at a given moment to achieve
what you need to achieve?  So
when I think about this stuff, I
think about this.  There's the
race against time.  You're on a
race against time.  And this
arcade game, the thing that
sticks with me is the idea of
like, oh, you have to reach your
next check point, and you have
to get there fast enough to get
your next time extension.
I think about my design work as,
like, oh, I have to get
something interesting in front
of you in order to get an
attention extension.
And if I don't, which it seem
like -- for some of you guys I'm
not successful, because some of
you guys are sleeping.  So I
need to get to the next kind of
attention extension.  How do I
do that?  Another metaphor,
then, I use is this idea of a
faucet and a sink.  All right?
Your attention is constantly
draining away, as it has been
since 9:00 in the morning today.
And we are kind of like here.
So what I need to do as a
designer, I need to like close
up that sink as much as possible
and then also open up the
faucet.  Kind of give you guys
stuff to feel like, oh, this is
worth my attention.  I'm going
to put more of it in here.  So
let's look at what are some
things that gains and drains
attention.
All right?  So things like gain
attention is like surprise.  I
remember the moment when Kyle
turned on the sound thing.
Like -- boom!  Suddenly, oh,
wow.  Kyle has my attention now,
right?  But something that is a
little bit more gentle is
delight.  Something that's fun,
something that's beautiful.
Something you have never seen
before.  Like Nadieh's talk, all
the gradient stuff.  I was like,
oh, you could do that with SVG?
Awesome.  Delight is very nice.
Order and coherence is also
nice.  It's the idea of do I
have to spend a lot of energy to
make sense of this?  Or if it's
already ordered and framed and
like organized well for you, so
your brain has to do less work.
Those things are able to tap
into your brain and use less
attention and gain you more
attention.
On the other side, what drains
attention?  Time.  Time drains
attention.  That's kind of
obvious.  We have stray
thoughts, our brains are here,
there, everywhere.  Some of our
brains between this screen, this
voice, those screens in front of
you.  And positions drain
attention.  Come to a Website,
and I ask you to click on
something, you have to decide to
click on that thing.  Like even
though it's easy, you have to
move your mouse to a particular
spot on screen and click that
button.  That's a decision that
takes attention.  Clutter.
Clutter takes attention.  If
something is disorganized, can't
make sense of it, your brain is
trying hard.  If you can remove
the clutter, it's not striving
to make sense that have stuff,
it's focused on what you need to
pay attention to
And lastly, confusion, drains
attention for reasons I have
already mentioned.  So these are
things that drain attention.  So
from a designer's point of view,
graphic designers.  Graphic
design is a fairly old
discipline.  Dealing with this
for a long time.  One of my
favorites from a mentor.  Her
name was Barbara de Wilde.  She
was teaching me about graphic
design.  This is her quote.
Graphic design is the use of
space to control time.  What
does she mean by that?
It means when a graphic design
is about manipulating things,
I'm going to put this here and
here, you can use that ordering
of how things are positioned in
space to control your experience
of things.
You are going to look at this
first and this next and this
next.  So I'm going to show you
this.  I didn't have to tell you
to, like, look at the thing --
look at the big title first.  I
didn't have to tell you to go
down -- go down this page.  I
didn't have to tell you to read
the last line.  That's because
this leverages conventions in
graphic design.  And conventions
in the western world, like
readers in the western world, we
read from the top left to the
bottom right.
These conventions, again, saves
attention.  Saves you from
having to think about what this
is.  And so when I approach my
design work, I try to leverage
these principles, right?
So even you kind of squint and
look at it, and don't read the
thing yet.  You get a sense,
what's the important thing?  The
first thing you see, a visual
introduction to machine
learning.  That's the value
proposition.  And there's a
weird, interesting-looking thing
on the right side.  You don't
know what that is yet, but it's
kind of cool.  And the last
thing you see is school.  It's
asking you.  Hey, if you're
interested, and this is clear,
please do this thing.
And so circling out, and just
like this is graphic design.
This is like how do you position
things in order to help you
direct the user's attention to
guide them towards some goal.
And if you don't believe me,
here is somebody else doing the
same thing, right?
This is one of my favorite New
York Times visualizations.  It
is about how the different
sectors of the economy recover
from the recession.  And very
similar.  Value proposition, a
vague thing that is not clear
what it is yet, but potentially
interesting, and then a call to
action.  And the call to action
is scroll.  So some of you may
know of my work, you're the
scrolling telling guy, you're
always asking people to scroll.
What's up with that?  That's
because a click is a decision.
A scroll is continuation.
It's continuing what you've
already been doing.  And so it's
less engagement, less decisions,
more attention to direct to the
stuff that you actually care
about.  Plus scrolling is fun.
If you scroll and a fun thing
happens, you're going to keep
scrolling and more fun things
happen.  Of course, now, the
next part of the talk, which is
animation.  Right?
Animation is the manipulation of
images to create the illusion of
motion.  And so why is this
cool?  Why is this good?  Well,
that's because motion is
pre-attentive.  What does that
mean?  That means there's a big
chunk of our brain near the back
of our skull, the visual cortex,
processes motion before it gets
to the front of the cortex.
There's a lot more processing
power back here than up here.
And so you can take in motion,
you can get a sense of motion,
even before you can like
consciously process it.  And if
you tap into that, once again,
you're saving conscious
attention.  But you're still
communicating.  Which is great.
So I'm going to show some
examples.  These are examples
from R2D3.  The first one is,
all right.  This starts growing,
what happens?  Some fun
animation happens.  But it's not
just fun, it hints at the idea
of the first dimension that
we're introducing into this data
set, which is elevation.
Elevation goes from the bottom
up, right?  And so this motion,
one, it's fun, grabs your
attention.  And two, okay, this
is elevation.  This is cool.
And then I use this transition
to turn that graph into a
scatterplot.  Once again, I'm
using motion to capture
attention.  But I'm also using
motion to show an idea.  It's
like, oh, this one-dimension
thing, now it's two-dimensions.
And the other reason to do this
is because you could imagine the
counterexample, which is, oh, I
have a graph.  I'll scroll it
out of view, put another
scatterplot in here, now what do
I have to do?  I have to
reestablish the context of what
this visualization is.  Now this
axis is the same, but this axis
is new.  Using this animated
transition, now I have saving
attention that I would have
spent reestablishing the
context.
Plus now I'm introducing a new
idea.  So I'm saving attention,
doing something fun.
This is a different part of the
project.  Where I'm using
animation, again, to show the
notion underneath of this
industry.  Which is, hey, in
order for you to get a sense of
kind of what position the tree
is doing, it splits the tree and
splits the data into chunks and
then it goes from top down.
Which is why the animation goes
from top down.  All right?
And having established this,
then I can actually do the
really fun visualization in R2D3
where the, like, little balls
fall down the tree.  All right?
And once again, I am using
motion, one, just to kind of
create a sense of delight.  But
also then to say, hey, this is
how the trees work.  The data
point will literally follow the
fork in the program to find the
end point and that's the
classification.  Okay.  Pause
here for a second.
So recap, we're trying to
reconstruct an idea that is, in
your head, in your audience's
head, right?  So these lessons
from graphic design and motion
design help us preserve
attention and directs attention.
But why?  Who cares?
So the reason that we care is
because we need to direct
attention to the pieces of the
puzzle.  The pieces and the idea
that you care about.  But how do
we know when to direct attention
where?  How do we know what
pieces go first?  How big should
these pieces be?  What do I even
mean by pieces?  All right?
So I'm going to take a slight
detour and choose the idea of
pace.  Pace.  Pace is to do
something at a slow and steady
rate in order to avoid
overexertion.  Right?  Remember
our idea of short-term memory.
You have maybe seven things in
your head at once.  You don't
want to overexert and blow it
up.
So how do you then take this
idea and pace this?  Oh, you can
move the whole thing through
without blowing up that
pipeline?  Kind of similar to
the pipeline that was talked
about earlier.  And so one way
to think about this, if you have
an idea of this, and this is a
Lego Flatiron building, my
favorite in New York.  How to
get from this to this?  If
someone dumped out Legos and
said build the Flatiron building
with this, you wouldn't know
where to start.  That's why the
kit comes with an instruction
manual.  Find the right piece,
this is the right and relevant
piece.  Put them together, fit
them together this way and
repeat and repeat and repeat.
It's preserving your attention
by not just give you a pile, but
instead this is the right thing
to focus your attention on now.
And the Lego instruction manual
hints at the relationship
between pieces in the -- in the
model, right?  So, like, oh.
This is one panel, this is a
different panel.  Pieces fit
together.  There's a dependency
between these things.
So by -- by kind of
understanding the dependencies,
and understanding the order in
which you fit these pieces
together, you can build up to
something big and interesting
from very small pieces.  And the
organization of principle for
doing that is pacing.
So let me show you a different
pile of Legos.
So this is the previous
iteration of the project about
campaign refinance reform.  This
was one of my first D3 projects.
I was excited.  I spent all
weekend working on this and
showed it to my classmates at
SVA, and they're like, oh cool.
What is it?
And that's because I just
literally felt every dimension
in the data on to the screen.
Built it.  And then if I told
you now, oh, all the circles on
the left side represent
election -- Senate seats where
democrats won, on the right side
the republicans won, and I gave
you like how to read this thing.
Oh, actually you can read this
thing and you can understand the
data.  But just dumping it out
on you, suddenly I've blown my
attention project.  What's
happening is this.  Your
attention is overwhelmed.
too many pieces.  The pieces are
too big.
So we need to figure out how to
break it down.  We have to pace
it out.  We have to find the
pieces that are too big and too
unwieldy and figure out how do
we break it apart?
So there's lots of ways of doing
it, but one good rule of thumb
is when you write it out and lay
it on the screen, are you
tempted to read it or skim it?
If your natural inclination is
like, I'm going to skim this,
you probably didn't break it
down enough
So what ended up happening was
this project, the same data set,
the same Senate seats.  But now
I'm focus on, hey, here's are
the idea, the next idea, the
third idea.  That's what I want
to focus your attention on, and
not necessarily all the Lego
pieces.  You can go poke around
in different circles and figure
out, hey, this is the thing.
But I just said you know what?
Let's just pick the right thing
to focus on and direct attention
there
The other principle for
thinking about how to break down
these ideas is recognizing that
ideas depend on other ideas.  So
given a big idea in your head,
how do you break it down?  Ideas
tend to not be entirely novel.
They tend to be composed of
other ideas.  Composed of
existing ideas.  Kind of like
how software is composed of
other software.  So you're kind
of dealing with a dependency
tree, almost.
So this is a very classic D3
example of the dependency
tree -- I actually don't know
what this is.  But this idea,
they depend on these ideas and
these ideas, and you can
understand the dependency tree
of your idea, you know the
pieces and you can break it
apart.  All right?
So and if I'm going to
reconstruct this idea in my head
in your head, I have to make
sure I load in all the
dependencies.  All right?  So
let's go back to the machine
learning example.  If I want to
help people understand what is
machine learning and I know that
my audience is a layperson who
may not even have taken much
statistics, I need to make sure
that this stuff is broken down
really well.  So let's see.
What does the idea of the
decision tree depend on?
Well it starts with the idea of
data, patterns
Not very controversial.  And
then -- I can't read that.
That's why I'm turning around.
And it says patterns may be
correlated with the desired
outcome.  So if you want to
predict if a house is in San
Francisco or New York, patterns
may help.  So together we can
start to say, hey, we can use
patterns to create some rule for
making a decision.  All right?
And I combine that with the idea
of statistics can precisely
capture a pattern.  Then now I
can say -- we can use statistics
to compute the best decision
rule.  And then I can say, hey,
if I combine that idea of using
statistics and saying, oh, I'm
going to subdivide things and
I'm going to do this over and
over and over again, suddenly I
get to this idea of decision
rules can be chained together to
improve accuracy.  That's where
the tree notion comes from.
Actually, I skipped ahead.  And
add the idea of like a tree met
or.  Now you have a decision.
This is roughly -- the
decision -- the dependency tree
of the idea of a decision tree.
One thing to note here is order
matters, all right?  You can't
just introduce these ideas and
say, oh, I'm going introduce
first and then do this other one
and then come back.  Right?  You
have to make sure that things
are in the right order.  You
want to start from the simplest
ideas.  And ideas that depend on
the other things, and the most
established in your audience's
head and then build up.  All
right?
And even visually.  When I think
as -- instead of the writing
part of this and think about
pasting, visually I do the same
thing.  So here is that first
kind of graph showing elevation.
Pretty simple graphic.
The next idea is like, oh, I'm
going to rotate it, so on this
side.  That's a pretty simple
transformation.  And I'm going
to now like collapse them and
turn them into a histogram.  And
you guys remember, I can show
the visualization -- the
animations after, but once
again, the idea is just like
this one idea.  I'm just going
to collapse them, that was a
histogram.  I'm going to choose
one more idea, which is visually
splitting the thing into two
populations.
And then now I'm going to
visually, again, repeat that
pattern that you have already
seen.  Suddenly you're like
starting to see the tree
structure.  And now I remove the
histogram and now you see the
tree.
So notice the thing that's
happening here.  I'm really just
introducing things one step at a
time.  All right?  Because if
your attention bandwidth is very
small, you have to break things
down to be that small to fit
through it.  So we -- as, well,
I don't know -- I can call
everybody here a designer, but
if you want to think about
things from a design point of
view, this is what we have to
think about.  We have to think
about preserving our audience's
attention.  We have to think
about how do we pace things such
that you're moving ideas from
your head to other people's
heads one step at a time.  And
my big takeaway from this is
always this idea of, like, hey,
we need to have a slow, measured
conveyance of ideas through this
gateway of attention.  And
everything needs to fit.
And so what do we talk about?
We talked about exposition.  How
to explain an idea to somebody.
I talked about the constraint.
The key thing that you have to
think about is not necessarily
colors, it's not necessarily
type, it's not necessarily size
or data, the key thing that you
need to think about when you're
explaining something to somebody
is how did you channel their
attention?
And so, of course, then I talk
about a bunch of techniques for
animation and pacing.  There's
lots more kind of research in
this kind of work.  I draw
heavily from, like cognitive
psychology, I draw heavily from
just like writing, technical
writing.  I draw heavily from
visual analytics, research.
Like cognitive psychology
research to think about all this
stuff.  But all of it is in
service of how do I conserve
this really precious resource of
attention?
And that's it.

