>> Hi.  Can you hear me?  Okay.
Thanks for having me.  Yeah.
I'm a designer.  So I've got a
background in graphic design and
interface design.  The last
couple of years, specializing in
data visualization.  And, yeah,
since one and a half years I'm
here in Boston.  I'm working
with a lab, and my colleagues
there are pretty much all
physicists and we are dealing
with complex systems and
networks and data science
issues.
And we're about 30 people.  And
I'm the designer.  I'm like the
odd guy in the group.  So
everybody else is like a hard
scientist.  And I'm more like
doing the graphics for them for
different topics.
One topic in the lab currently
is success.  And how can we
understand success.  What is
success?  How can we measure it?
And we think of success as
having two main ingredients.
The one ingredient is
performance, so you need to be
good at something to be
successful.  You need to be a
good writer, you need to be a
good programmer and good
musician or good artist to be
successful.  But on the other
side, this needs to be reflected
by society.  So if you are
writing this amazing poems, but
nobody ever read them, like it's
not really success.
So what we study is like this
interplay between those two
things and how they actually
create success together and how
it works.  So this is like a
triangle that we're studying.
And you can think of many
examples in like contemporary
culture where the triangle is
not 100% in sync.  So most
probably pretty much all of you
know these two people.  Paris
Hilton and the Kardashians.  And
they're extremely popular, but
they're not really performing
specifically well in anything in
particular.

So -- and you can also think
about like other examples in the
sport world.  Where David
Beckham, he is performing very
good, and he is at the top of
what he's doing, but maybe his
popularity is a bit higher than
that.
And same for Tiger Woods, the
discussion at the moment goes in
very different directions than
what he actually does when he
plays golf.
So there's a saying that the
celebrity is a person who is
known for his well-known-ness.
There's a disconnect between
performance and popularity.  And
we were interested if this also
exists in sport.  So how are
performance and popularity
related to each other?
To study this, we looked at
tennis.  We looked at tennis
because it's an individual
sport.  Team sports are complex
with the players interacting
with each other.  And we wanted
to have a sport that's well
known.  That's how we got to
tennis.  And we looked at the
performance data from the ATP
Website.  That's the world cup
of tennis.  And looked at with
Wikipedia updates from 2009 to
2015
Our final data set consists of
the 500 male players and two
data sources.  And my colleague,
she's a physicists, they have a
special relationship to data.
They want to understand data and
they want to model and predict
things.  What her goal was to
predict page had views based on
the performance of a player.
When I interested the project,
my first initial idea was to
visually compare this.  So how
can we compare?  How can we make
visualizations to compare page
views and the model predictions
that she came up with?
And this is like the first chart
that I did.  Each line
represents one player.  And then
we have on the Y axis the number
of page views and the predicted
page views.  So each player is
like two points.  So we've got
the page views and then the
model prediction.  So the bigger
this bar, the worse the
prediction actually was.  And if
it's red, that means it's turned
around.  So like that, we had an
overview of everybody and could
see how -- when the model works
and when it's not working.  And
that's like a little interface
where you can have like -- it
should work.
This should be running.  Okay.
Let's see how it goes along.  So
you can have other people and
you can sort it in different
directions.  I'm not sure why
it's not doing it.
So but one question that came up
was what about time?  It's a
highly aggregated view if we
only have like two points for
one person.  And I got back to
like the difference chart from
1786.  So like super modern data
science and like this 200 --
300-year-old chart.  And this
shows you the difference between
the model and the actual
Wikipedia data over time for
each person.
And this is like a visualization
that I came up with where we can
compare every player in one
chart.  And I hope this is
working now.  Okay.  So need to
get out of this and I need to
show it to you.  Maybe I can go
to the Website.
So -- it's not showing.  Okay.
Okay.  This works.  Better.
Okay.  So we have for each
person one of these icons and we
can sort them by different
things.  So we can sort them by
name, which is not really
helpful, but we can find like
other arrangements.  Sort them
by the ranking they have and see
actually -- like find the
patterns in this data set.  Or
we can arrange them by the page
views they have.  And each
person is like this little icon.
And we can see what creates a
model and how -- what's going
on.  And also like on a scale
and see each person.
And then for each player we have
two data points now for each
year, which is still very
aggregated.  So what I made was
like you can click this person.
And you actually get this
close-up view where you can see
on the one side the predictive
page views and then what is
actually the real data.
And down here the Wikipedia
article.  It was helpful for the
scientists, because they can
read up about the players.  And
then we can also search for
somebody.
Okay.  Maybe not.  And -- yeah.
We can go through this and sort
this for all kinds of things and
see how they're doing.
So -- maybe my -- maybe it --
up.  So now even the video is
working.  So we can go on.  So
one question that I had was like
from this, what is actually
creating these models?  I mean,
it's this completely black box.
Just showing me numbers and
didn't know what it is.  So what
is making up this model that I'm
talking about?  And this is a
formula.  I'm not sure -- I'm a
designer.  So I don't know -- I
wasn't able to handle this.  But
I was able to talk to my
colleagues and ask her and
bother her with questions.  And
try to understand what's going
on here.  And after a while it
became quite understandable.  So
what we see here, that's a rank
of a player over time.  So when
the player, and which ranking.
That was important to come up
with this prediction of page
views.  And then also the number
of active years.  How long did
they play in tournaments?  And
then the number of matches.  So
how far did they get in the
tournament?  If you play seven
rounds during the final, and the
tournament value.  It's quite
different than if you play in a
grand slam versus playing
against your neighbor.  And the
best rival in the tournament,
who was the best person you
played against?  So those five
variables made up the model and
created it.  What I had to do
was take what we know about
graphical perception and map it
against this five dissensions.
So I can show you now what I
came up with.  Okay.  Cool.
It's working.  So one of the
first decisions I made was like
the one linear time scale.  So
like the wider the gaps, the
more tournaments a player had in
that year.  So you can see in
the beginning of the career,
like he played more tournaments
and then it got less
tournaments.  And also the
height of the axis indicates the
best ranking of that year.  So
I'm already encoding some
information within the chart.
And then -- yeah.  So I'm adding
in points for each tournament he
played over his career.  So
we've got to complete
description of all the
tournaments he ever played.  And
on the Y axis I point at the
rankings, they're very important
for the model.  I'm using a log
rhythmic scale, high ranks are
more valuable than lower ranks.
If you move from 200 to 190,
it's not as important as you
move from rank ten to rank one.
So -- and then I'm adding in the
number of matches.  And so the
lengths -- if you play seven
rounds, you're in the final, so
it's like seven different steps
that you can make.  And then I'm
adding in the score points as
colors.  So grand slams are the
darkest colors, and then the
less points you get, the lighter
the colors are.
And then if there was a strong
opponent in that game, I added
in these blue dots for when he
had to play -- in the beginning
of the career, this is really
happening a lot.  And that
became this final interface.
Where we, again, had the
Wikipedia article down there,
and then just selections on the
side.  And, yeah.  You can
actually like see the data
points.  So just small
adjustments that I made.

15:11:42
So the next step.  I thought
about how could I make something
where I have all this
information of all these players
in one chart and not only like
in separate charts?
And I turned to an idea which is
actually perceptually very bad.
So turning something linear into
something radial.  It's much
harder to read for us.  But what
it's good at, it create this is
unity.  It creates like this
iconic symbol for each player.
Which I then could use and --
yeah -- plot all of them
together in one chart.  And
create this -- so you can see
the entire career of a player
within this.
And, again, we can -- this is
now the final tool.  So we can
do like exactly the same thing
as before.  We can sort them.
Put them on different axis.
Click on them and get a detailed
view with the Wikipedia article.
So this is something I haven't
talked about.  This is like the
in-between stage.  So all we see
here is only the Wikipedia page
views over time without the
model.  Without the prediction.
And then, yeah, we can click.
Do the same thing.  That became
like the final interface.
That's also online so you can
play around with it.
So here is just a close-up of the
circles and how they look in a
larger space.
So some findings that we came up
with.  First of all there's
hope.  Generally there's a trend
that if you are playing well,
you also get recognition of that
from society.  But there are
some tricks so you can cheat in
some ways.  One thing is, have a
very good brother.  So if your
brother is first in the world,
your page views will also go up.
And then we found this.  Like we
made this interface, and we
found a lot of these plots.  And
we didn't know what was going
on.  And they all looked very
strange.  So what's actually
happening is is that the model
already predicts that there
should be page views.  They
should have a certain number of
page views.
And there are no page views.
And then after some time, the
model and the actual page views
synchronize and they go like
along the same way.  And it
turns out that this Wikipedia
pages were not finished.  Just a
name or a sentence.  They were
not done.  So as soon as
somebody sat down and wrote an
article about that person, like
the page views and the model got
synchronized.  So the model is
actually predicting something
that's not happening at that
point.
So that was quite an interesting
finding.  And then we found a
lot of people that looked like
this.  So this like one hit
wonder who had like this
extraordinary spike.  This was
Lukas Rosol.  He defeated Rafael
Nadal in 2011 in the second
round.  That brought him the 15
minutes of fame that then
diminished again.  And then
there's this.  Ryan-Sweeting.
So he actually never had a
really good tennis career until
mid-2013.  And then his tennis
career didn't take off.  But his
page views went all crazy.  So
what happened?
He actually got married to a
famous actress.  So if you are
bad at tennis, like marry
someone famous.  And you're
sorted out.

So -- yeah.  So something more
like in the background, what I'm
thinking about at the moment, is
like seeing visualizations as
this trading zone.  This word
trading zone comes from a
science historian at Harvard,
Peter Garrison, and it's in
between different groups which
then connect different groups
and thoughts and knowledge
domains.  And what a very
obvious example for with this,
this connection between data and
scientists so that visualization
can be a bridge.  In that sense.
But it can also be a bridge
between scientists.  So a lot of
the things happening in the lab
that a biologist is working with
a physicist, and they speak
different languages, and they
can talk about and understand
each other better with the
visualizations.  And in the
third step, used to open up
science and make it public.  I
mean, it's the same data set
that is used within the lab
that's now open to the public
through this interface and you
can explore and people can play
around with.
And if I look at this, I will
say visualizations are loopy by
themselves.  So before the end
of this talk, now, we have got a
new project that I launched like
a week ago.
And we make like a little
trailer for this.  And while I
was cutting this video ahead of
myself, because I was cutting it
in 4K, and I was like, why do I
need it in such a high
resolution.  Well, now I know.

And I'm very happy to show you.
>> To look up at a starry night
sky is to look up at a fast
network.  A cosmic web where
discreet is held together by
gravity.  So little is known
about the network, it's
difficult to know about the
architecture of the universe or
how it's built.  Why are some
similar and others have no
relation?  Our research created
three models.  By controlling
different parameters between
galaxies in each model, we can
see the network shift from
separate galaxy clusters to a
fully interconnected network.
In each model, they form links
based on certain parameters.  In
the first, we connected galaxies
based on distance.  The second
and most complex model connected
galaxies based on size.  The
third model connected galaxies
to their nearest neighbor.  When
we compared our models to the
actual universe, we discovered
something surprising.  Despite
its simplicity, the third model
offered the best correlations.
While this research is
uncovering the blueprints of the
universe, these new mathematical
tools can be applied to a whole
range of cosmological concerns.
From validating cosmic inflation
to improving halo finders.
>> Cool.  Thank you very much.

It's an online tool.  You can
check it out.
