>> Thank you for the
introduction.  Thank you so much
for having me at this
conference.  It's been so
awesome.  And I am intimidated
as hell to be talking in front
of all of you brilliant people.
This is actually the first time
I've ever spoken at a conference
too.
So thanks for having me.  Last
talk!
All right.  So right.  Designing
Virtual Reality Visualizations.
What's VR?  Cool.  Some people
know, some don't, some people
have some big ideas.  Here's a
2D line chart, a 3D line chart.
Here is VR or what you would see
if you were wearing a VR
headset.  So it's 3D in
stereoscopic, you get a
different image in each eye and
an added dimension to play with,
time, or motion if you choose to
use it.  And you have a thing on
your head that looks like maybe
one of these things.  Oculus or
Google Cardboard.  Or -- there's
a lot of them coming out now.
If you don't have a Google
Cardboard, you can go get it.  I
would really suggest it.  It's
easy to get.
I just looked it up before this
talk, it's $5.  That's like dot
come, something.  If you have 5
bucks, I would highly recommend
getting the Google Cardboard.
All right.  So why is everyone
so into VR?  What's the big
deal?  It hacks your brain, it's
really nuts.  If you haven't
tried it before, try it out.
Your mind is tricked into
believing that you are present
in the world that's rendered in
VR.  Not necessarily not in the
world that you're currently in,
but you really just get the
sense, like if here's just a
couple of images that are
examples.  Like this is one
where you put your arms out in
front of you, and you have this
thing on your head, and there's
a spider on the table.  And then
it really like feels like that
spider is about to crawl on your
arm.  You get chills up your
arm.  It's crazy.
This is a visualization someone
made of the walk on a tight rope
between the twin towers.  And
you look down, and you're like,
oh, man.  That really feels
scary.
So it hacks your brain in a way
that I've never experienced
before.  It really creates a
depth of emotion that I think
people are really excited about.
Cool.  So there's two kinds of
VR content being made right now.
And there's AR, which is
augmented reality, which is a
whole other ball game, I'm not
going to get into, but right now
the two kinds of VR content are
360-degree video and rendered 3D
graphics.  So 360-degree video,
there's been a lot of journalism
done.  And I come from a
journalism background.  So I'm
going to be sort of focus on
journalistic applications.
Harvest of change was one of the
first ground breaking ones.
This placed an amazing piece by
New York.  Times magazine.  The
Wall Street Journal put out a
cool piece following a ballerina
behind the scenes at Lincoln
Center.  All of these are really
rad.  And then there's 3D
rendered.  How do you make it
happen?
For the 360 video, you need a
whole crap ton of GoPros or new
fancy 360-degree cameras.  And
the render stuff, 3D rendering
software, people use unity.  And
three.js, and it's open source,
it's JavaScript.  It's a new
medium.
In 2012 Nonny de la Pena debuted
hunger in Los Angeles.  The
Google Cardboard only came out
in July of 2014.  And now it's
now.  It really hasn't been that
long since July 2014.  That was
really the turning point in
accessibility for VR content.
Like if you make something now
people can actually see it.  So
it really hasn't been that long
since it happened.
So this is a datavis conference,
right?  There's been a lot of VR
journalism that's 360-based.
It's really cool.  But I want to
see more of taking advantage of
the experience of the VR to tell
data-driven stories.  That
sounds hard.  Someone that has
been doing this is this guy,
Brian, works at POV.  Or had
worked at POV.  Now has his own
company.  Dataviz.  Can I make
this video thing happen?  No.
>> It was working.
>> Oh.  Sick.  Try it again.
All right, cool.  So I'll let
this play through.  He created
this visualization and you're
walking through a city.  This is
census data, I think.  And this
goes for a while.  And then the
next part of this video that you
see -- I don't know if keynote
will let me fast forward, so I'm
going to just keep talking.  The
next part of this video you'll
see is -- here we go.  Crime
rates.  So the areas in red have
a higher crime rate than the
surrounding area.  And that, I
think, really takes advantage of
your sort of visceral experience
moving through this space.  It's
primal.  We understand that red
is bad or danger or poison,
don't eat that frog or whatever.
So as you're walking through it,
going through it, you're going
through a red zone, you really
feel it's dangerous.  So I think
that's a really successful use
of it.
So here at the Wall Street
Journal -- not here, in New
York.  We made this thing, VR
NASDAQ, that was pegged to when
the NASDAQ broke its previous
record, its previous high from
the year 2000.  Which was just
about one year ago.  Almost one
year exactly ago.  And I'll show
you a demo of that.
We made it in web GL.  So I'm
not going to show the
stereoscopic version, you can do
that in your Google Cardboards
that I'm assuming you're all
going to get from Sears.com for
$5 and look at it that way.  But
right now I'm going to show it
to you in the sort of 3D mode.
In IMAX.
So you start pre-2000 boom.  You
can see sort of elements going
by on the left-hand side.  Like
a timeline.  And the path that
you're walking on is mapped to
the inverse of the price to
earnings ratio.  So as you are
approaching the top, that path
is getting really, really
skinny.  And you can look down
and see, man, that is a skinny
path.  That is dangerous.
And that happened really fast.
It this is really steep.  And
we're about to go down.  And
here we go.  Oh.  Oh, no.  Oh,
no.
I've never had to narrate this
in realtime before.  Utilize the
sort of color understanding as
well with the areas of red being
times of recession.  So now
we'll just sort of climb slowly
back to the present day.  Or one
year ago when the NASDAQ broke
its previous high.  And as
you're sort of coming back up,
you really get the sense that
like it's a pretty steady climb.
That path that you're walking on
is nice and wide.  Looks pretty
stable.  It feels very different
than it felt when you were at
the part of the visualization
from the year 2000 in that giant
bubble.
And that feeling, that different
feeling was -- I think we
utilize that to communicate --
yeah, to communicate all those
numbers were the same.  The
price of the NASDAQ index was
the same.  Oh, and there's the
rocket mode -- the price was the
same, but the feeling is
different.  And that's it.  Plus
rocket ships, because -- why
not?
Cool.  So like I said, we use D3
and open js.  Open source
libraries.  And my partner in
creating this interactive, Roger
Kenny, is the man.  I was
involved in the conceptual and
design.  And our art director
was very involved in art
direction.  The majority of the
code base was written by Roger
and he rules.  And you can rule
too.  Because he wrote a
tutorial, a brief tutorial for a
setup.  And you can find here.
And I have a resources slide at
the end that I'll just leave up.
And happy to share with whoever.
It's actually pretty easy.
There's a lot of open source
tools to making sort of basic VR
environments.
Yeah.  Depending on time I was
going to do a demo of that.
Yeah, maybe after.  After.
Okay.  So why do we do it?  I
already talked about that part.
Why do we do it in the browser?
So anybody can look at it.  In
the Google Card boards you are
getting for $5.  A third party
player for 360 degree video, and
wouldn't need to do stitching
for the GoPros.  It's a huge
video file and really tedious.
So browser-based, 3js, VR.
Awesome.
Some challenges.  Kind of a lot
of challenges.  I'll start with
user intersection.  How do you
design an interface when your
user has no hands?  Like over
here, the hands are over here
holding the thing on their head.
How are you supposed to navigate
an interface like that?  There
are really two inputs that we
can take advantage of, the focal
point in the very center.  And
there's like one button on the
side of most headsets.  So we
use that to do like stop and go.
And the focal point to kind of
look at a button.
But, of course, you can't just
have people pressing buttons
willy nilly, whatever they look
at, so we had sort of a
countdown.  We had this
stoplight metaphor of like red,
yellow, green.  And Google in a
lot of stuff they make, they
have a concentric circle thing
that grows and lets you know
that you have selected a button.
Or action item.
There might be more
possibilities that open up when
people start using controllers
in conjunction with headsets.
But right now I work at Wall
Street Journal, I'm thinking
about making stuff that's kind
of as accessible as possible to
the most number of people.
So I'm not thinking about the
problem too much of how to make
the most complicated, intricate
to navigate visualization
interactive in VR.  Because it's
not -- it's not my problem to
solve right now.  But maybe it's
yours.  That sounded so corny.
First talk ever.  There we go.
Information density has to be
kind of low because it's hard to
read in VR.  And that's the real
thing.  Like the paragraphs we
had on those sort of bulletin
things were kind of about as
much as we could get in there.
And there was a timeline
element, but it was hard to
focus on all the stuff going by.
It's hard to read text in VR.
Eyestrain and nausea are real
things.  And in the VR at
NASDAQ, we kind of had to find
this balance -- we had weekly
data of the NASDAQ, but we
didn't want the camera to bounce
along each of those data points,
because then you get really
nauseous.  So we had to find
something in between, like
staying accurate to the data and
making something that wouldn't
make people feel sick.  So Roger
worked hard on this algorithm
that sort of followed the curve
of it without being too bumpy.
But I'm still not sure if we got
that quite right or not.  And it
was difficult.
There's also a perception
difficulties with 3D charts.  As
Kennedy mentioned, I definitely
made this slide today.  We're
not that good at reading 3D
charts.  So it might not be an
ideal medium for a lot of data
visualizations.  And
gimmickiness, people are going
to yell at you on Twitter if you
make some VR chart thing just
for the sake of making a VR
chart thing and then put it out
there.  People are going to be
like, why did you do that?  And
then you're going to be like,
stop.  I'm sad.  Don't make fun
of me.
I'm like in second grade in my
head.  Yeah.  People don't
generally have the cardboards
yet either.  That's a thing.  Or
they don't have headsets yet.
So like designing for cardboard,
designing for the sort of lowest
VR denominator is the thing.
And having a fallback, which you
can just look at in the browser
if you go to/3D NASDAQ, that's
what you see in your browser.
WSJ/3D NASDAQ.  And
One more thing, I'm going to
show you a flowchart.  Ready?
This was a giant pain in the
butt.
Yeah.  So VR chart versus line
chart.  You get a third
dimension, a time dimension, the
magic brain hacking feeling.
But you lose interactions, lose
ease of navigation,
accessibility, legibility, lose
perceptional accuracy and have a
heightened risk of people making
fun of you on Twitter.  So what
is it good for?  Like why do
that?  Because that seems like a
whole lot of bad things.
It's good for potentially
multidimensional data that you
wouldn't be able to explore
otherwise.  And it's good for
using people's feelings about
space to communicate stuff about
data sets.  What does that mean?
But how?
I don't know is the answer.
Here are some things that I
thought of that people have
feelings about that have to do
with space.  Fear of heights.
It's hard to walk on small
things.  Red maybe means danger.
Moving quickly feels different
than moving slowly.  Flying is
cool, point pointy things might
hurt, large things might be
heavy.  Et cetera, et cetera.
Why use this to visualize data?
I don't know.  We made it at
NASDAQ a year ago.  And I
haven't thought of another great
reason to do it again yet.
Which is why I haven't.  So you
guys think of something.
And then tell me before you tell
anyone else about it.  Is VR a
fad?  Is something people are
thinking.  But I think hell nah.
Or at least I've had the Kool
aid.  One of the reasons, kids
dig it.  Kids really like VR.
And in ten years people who are
kids now are going to be like
the main consumer of tech
content.  So kids dig it.  So we
all kind of got to get on board,
I think.  So now is the part
where I show you some of the
coolest shit I have ever seen.
Ready?  Maybe it's easier to do
this in the browser.  How do I
do that?  Let's see.  Coolest
shit I've ever seen time.
Is that working?  Sweet.  This
is called the machine to be
another.  So these two people
are wearing that and they are
seeing the other person's body
in their eyeballs.  And that is
crazy.  People talk a lot about
empathy and empathy being like
the most important thing for
journalism right now.  Or being
able to harvest empathy, make
people feel something.  Make
people understand the point of
view of another person in a
world of another group of
people.  That's why we tell
stories, right?  That's kind of
it.
So I think this is an incredible
tool.  Just an incredible tool
to be able to do that.  I'm so
stoked.  You can tell.  I'm
sure.
This is tilt brush.  Which is
the HTC vibe.  Which I haven't
gotten to try yet.  But I'm
looking forward to it home boy
is drawing in 3D.  And that is
nuts.  And then you can go like
walk in the middle of the
drawing.  That's crazy.  That's
some of the coolest shit seen.
This is Oculus toy box.  That
guy is like playing with another
human being who's not in the
physical space he's in, but is
in the virtual space he's in.
And they're waving at each
other.  See?  Thumbs up, cool.
That is some of the coolest shit
I have ever seen.  Right?  I
mean, man.  This is a Tribeca
film institute interactive
Website.  And they have a lot
more really awesome stuff.  So
that is a really good resource
for checking out more of the
coolest shit you have ever seen
in your life.
I think I might be ready to go
back.  And we're back.  Oh.  I'm
done.  Cool.  Thank you.
