>> Hello.  Yeah.  Hello,
everybody.  Thank you so much
for having me.  It's been a
great pleasure to be here.
Absolutely great pleasure.  I
need to see if I can get my --
ah, yes, wonderful.  I can get
my curser over here.  This is
really sophisticated.  Thank you
so much.  My topic is Our Planet
Seen from Space.  And I'm a
Ph.D. candidate at the
University of Alaska favor
banks, and I moved to consider
Fairbanks in 2011.  I worked
with a company with marketing
software, and someone or
something attracted me to
Alaska.  Really, either they
stick there or don't.  And I
really fell in love with the
north.  There's so much going on
and people don't know about it.
I monitor wildfires with
satellite imagery.  A few people
give me money to do that.  Give
a shoutout to NASA and several
organizations.
there was very much seen from
space in the title slide
earlier.  So I put -- we see a
lot of pictures from space.
This is from the international
space station, shows the aurora
borealis, the lights that we
have a lot of where I live in
the winter.  And the preparation
of my talk, the question is,
there's so much mapping there,
no one in the audience won't say
projection or something like
that, but even if you work in a
different field.  But hardly
anyone uses satellite imagery.
There's a lot of it there.  We
send students out all the time
to get like GIS vector data
from, for example, the local
government and then put it on a
map as an exercise.  This is
very common to do.  But we
rarely give them some satellite
imagery and put it on a map and
do something with it.
For those who are unfamiliar,
the differences are quite stark.
So for vector data, you have
files that could be proprietary
like the geo, that's open, a
flat file.  It's basically a
database table where each record
has a geometry associated with
it.  Point, polygon, or some
variations of it.
And the image that comes out of
your digital camera, it's an
array where each cell has a
value.  And I have been
wondering why is everybody going
to the vector and no one -- few
work with raster.  It's
something to do with vector data
being an abstraction, and then
you do something concrete, make
a concrete presentation of it,
and for raster, and the other
way around, you already started
with the representation, and you
analyze and extract something
from it.  I'm not sure.  Maybe
this is just a speculation.
This is, however, a data
visualization conference.  Not
an image analysis conference.
This is one in one direction,
the other in the other
direction.  Maybe.  Who knows.
But both are just data.  We can
deal with data.  If you're a
developer or can program, I'm
self-taught.  To one gave me a
stamp.  I can deal with data.  I
can deal with data.  Vector-type
tables, geolocation data
associated with it, and meta
data.  Meta data is extremely
important, it tells you what's
in the data.  Plus the data is
to the arrays, stacked, and
sometimes you have these things
that have time and height and
all sorts of dimensions
associated with it with
geolocation data and meta data.
So we can deal with this.  But
should we?  The question is
should we care that there are
oodles of free satellite data
available?  Well, obviously I
wouldn't be here if I didn't
think we should care.  But I
think we should give it some
thought.  And, for example, here
let me just start with
something.  You will recognize
this as a satellite image of
some sort.  I actually
downloaded it from scratch.  I
got it from the archive and made
this to show you.  What is this?
Oh, see if that actually works
from this.  So you can see it's
something -- huh.  Yes, it does.
It does not work.  So I have to
change this over, I'm sorry.  I
apologize for this.  All right.
And this -- ha.  This will work.
If I find this -- there's a
market here.  And this is where
I live, Fairbanks.  So I can
zoom into this.  And I can zoom
in like this.  Right.  So I can
zoom into it, move around in
it I can see there is a river.
There is something weird going
on over here.  And this is --
there was a fire.  This image
was from 2013, July.  We had a
huge fire here.  I don't live in
Fairbanks, I live here, 30 miles
outside Fairbanks, we had to
evacuate.  I want to know these
things, and go from the south.
Something interesting happens, I
will see glaciers.  There are
big glaciers here.  And you see
that these glaciers, once went
up to all the way here, now
they're here.  And I can do even
more.  I can go over here and I
can switch the imagery over.
And suddenly this is a bit dark.
We saw this earlier, I'm sorry.
But this glacier actually -- and
this is an image from 1987.  I
also got this one, put it all
together.  And the glacier is a
little bit further ahead in 1987
than it is now.  Glaciers
retreat really fast.  So this
sort of thing is not unfamiliar
to people who live where I live.
And we want to work with it.
And you might want to too, you
know?  You -- where's my mouse?
You might have a mine outside
your town that might have a
problem somewhere.  For example,
this mine in 2014, it's in
Canada.  On the left it was July
29th and there is a tailing
pond, on the south.  And August,
the tailing pond is gone, it
rained, and the creek then
became a huge mud bath.  So you
might want to have images of
this and follow what's going on
in your environment.
And some people have now started
to do this professionally.  One
of the motivations I had for
giving a talk about it was
seeing this journalistic
investigation.  It's a piece by
Pro Publica, published a year
ago about the disappearing coast
of Louisiana, losing ground.  I
heard from the developers that
worked with the team, he had
never learned to deal with
satellites.  They went and got
the data and made the
visualization.  They are
wonderful.  Google, you can find
it.
That tells me that as a science
educator and communicators, of
course, we use science imagery.
But not just us, maybe citizen
scientists, people who want to
monitor their town or state.
Industrial development.
Agricultural development, does
my city get more parks?  They
disappear?  What's going on?  Is
it growing or shrinking?  And of
course some of us help planning
for disasters.  I happen to work
with the fire service and they
also need to understand this
better.
So this brings me to my third
question.  What data and
toolkits do we have to do this?
And if you think of the image I
had from the Louisiana
investigation in the bottom
right corner, there was this
little thing here, this little
map telling you where you are,
and it says source: NASA, USGS
Landsat.  And that's where you
can go.  I thought we should
know a little bit more about
satellite imagery.  What
satellites are we talking about.
We talk about something called
polar orbiting satellites.
There are others.
We heard early tracking
satellites, communication
satellites.  They have different
orbits.  And you have heard of
geostationary satellites.  They
just look at the same part of
the earth all the time and they
are very far away from the earth
because they orbit with the
earth.  They are about 10% all
the way to the moon.  Which is
really far.  Whereas the polar
orbiting satellites are just
about 800, 700 kilometers above
us.  The international space
station is even lower.
So they actually get a pretty
good image of the earth.  And as
you can see, well, one here has
orbited itself out.  Start it
again.  Oh.  Well, I don't
know -- anyhow, you can see here
that it will acquire the image
in a band that goes around.  And
at the poles those bands overlap
more.  Which is why at the poles
you put down -- or close in the
poles in the high latitudes,
putdown receiving stations.  We
have two operate, one operated
for NASA, and the other one uses
their software which is open
source.  If you have a thing
like that, you don't need any
permission for it.  But, yes,
institutions can actually do
that, you know, and some do it
commercially.  We have stations
by NOAA, that's the National
atmospheric and oceanographic
organization that does the
weather service.  So they have
satellites there.  And then we
also sometimes do a dish like
this in the woods.  Dig a little
deeper, it's a private company
that runs that satellite.
So as I said, the easiest
satellites to use actually is
Landsat.  The nice thing is it's
all free.  Spatial resolution is
30 meters, each pixel is pretty
much a square 30 by 30 meters.
It's good enough.  The images I
showed were -- not good enough
for monitoring your house.  But
anything a little bit bigger,
yeah.
It has a data archive.  It goes
back to the '70s, which is
great.  And the data is
published in the GeoTIFF.
Basically a TIFF with your
information.  We will come to
that.  If you want satellite
data, you need to work with data
portals.
And this is I think one of the
biggest portals.  They are
written by scientists for
scientists.  And that's not
always a good thing.  But the
people who run these data
portals have become a lot more
aware of questions of usability.
There are now organizations who
talk about data usability,
discoverability, meta data
standardization, thing like
that.  I think this is a great
development.  And some of the
easier to use portals are
actually not hard to use.  This
one has a lot of public data,
not just from Landsat, but other
satellites, including
non-satellite data, aerial
imagery, historical aerial
imagery from the '50s, really
interesting stuff.  And it's
really, get an account, simple
registration.  Don't have to
belong to any particular -- you
just have to have an e-mail
address.  You do a selection by
location.  You have a relatively
easy to use -- well, it's clear,
right?  And, well, just leave
open everything you don't
understand and this one actually
still works.  Others don't.
This one is really good.  When
you go there you can make your
selection and here the images
for some reason they have
disappeared.  But when you want
to download it, you get some
offers.  You see Landsat look
images, they are a few
megabytes.  If you want to
illustrate something, good.  If
you want to view spatial mapping
you need something slightly
better.
Well, the lens that look with a
geographic reference comes with
a little file that's called a
are row file.  Better than
nothing.  Many applications work
with that.  If you want the full
thing, you get the level one
product.  And for the older
data, the older Landsat had a
lower pixel, 150 megabyte for
one.  The new one is about 900
megabytes.  2 gigabytes.  So you
have to deal with this amount of
data.
Alternatives, there is a similar
satellite.  And I will go with
what they are from the European
space agency.  The sentinel
missions.  And the Europeans,
until recently, had like the
Japanese and others had more of
a philosophy it that, yes, the
data should be available, but
for registered users in a
well-recognized institution.
But I think it was a good
influence of the United States
whereas always this idea that
public produced data should be
public.  I think this is one of
the good principles here.
They had really -- they have
made some headway.  And the
sentinel data is available, ESA.
It's in JPEG2000.  I have less
experience with it, but it's
workable.
And then if you want to map the
whole world, if you wanted to
climate mapping, you need
something like MODIS or VIIRS,
search for them.  Maybe more
arduous data formats.  But your
tools work with them.
If you sign up, sentinel data,
it's open and free to all.  It's
wonderful.  Used to not be like
this.  And sentinel data is
going to be ten to 20 meters
resolution, which is very nice.
There are a few more, one called
Spot is a French one.  These are
not free.  But the state of
Alaska has bought this data they
have for my state.  That might
be the case for your state or
country.  Just check and look.
A good source is also NASA
worldview.  It's a very rich
interface.  You can overlay all
sorts of layers and download
directly from there.
But as you can see, the download
names are really complicated,
and the performance, HTS, so
there's learning here.
What is a satellite image?  It's
actually, as I said, not very
different than any other image
that you have, except there's a
lot of channels.  The current
Landsat has 11 channels, the old
one had 7, MODIS, 36.  Some
satellite sources that have 120
channels.  You do look at those,
but some have just four.  Then
you select some and make a full
color from them.  And depending
on what you select, you will get
a different result.  Here's what
you get from Landsat.
Currently, it's unzipped, and
the TIF files, it sorts it in
this order, of course.  And down
to band nine.  And then a
quality band.  You can forget
about that, and the MTL has the
meta data.  And the library I
will talk about.  We will read
the meta data, it's not even
XML.  Well, it's not -- but it's
okay to read.  So depending on
which channels you combine, here
is a fire, I worked on
wildfires, this was last year, I
had a lot of them.  Having a lot
of them this year.  In a town
called willow, under the smoke.
There's a beautiful river to the
left.  And you can see this is a
color combination that is most
close to the eyes.  So this is
the natural color image.  It's a
glacial river, has a lot of
silt, looks gray.  And you can't
see the fire, there is smoke
there.  There is a road, we
don't have many in Alaska.  But
if you take the bands in the
near and short-wave infrared, if
you know micrometers, one to two
micrometers and combine with the
visible bands.  If you don't
know, infrared is good for
smoke, you get an image of where
the fire is, and most of the
smoke disappeared because it has
it looking through the smoke.
This has a thermal band that
works at a higher wavelength.
It's raid ration emitted by the
fire.  And you can plot this
too.  I opened this in a free
image processing software and
added a color.  You could do it
with a command too.  That's what
I did here.
So the question is now what can
we do with this?  How do we get
that have anyway?  And what is
our infrastructure here?  So I'm
a Python person.  You can have
similar things in R, and many of
the underlying libraries that
approach in GEOS and GDAL, they
have findings in Python and
other languages.  NUMPY is
Python specific.  And you have
special libraries to plot or
read the files if you need them.
You don't need those for
Landsat.  And Pygaarst, my
library, making opening them
easier and Sean contributed with
his tools shapely, fee owe that
and rasterio, or rasterio, I
never know.  And these are built
on the underlying libraries.
They need them installed, but
you don't have to deal with the
pretty awkward interface in the
API.
So to come together to get the
images I showed you, you need
the GDAL, it's a big library.
It comes with command utilities.
And you can just take what I
showed you earlier, cut them to
the size you want.  You will
need the library to figure out
where your coordinates may be.
You may know the latitude and
longitude.  But it doesn't come
in a latitude/longitude, it's a
projection.  And if you want all
together, you can use merge.py
to mosaicking stuff together.
And shell scripting is your best
guess here.  It's a good skill.
You don't need more than
associated commands.  But basic
knowledge of scripting is a good
their here.
And now you downloaded the data
and you have RGB come positive
its and the combinations you
want.  And sometimes you see
something really interesting by
using a combination that no one
told you to do.  There is a lot
of pretty artistic stuff that
comes out of this.  Vegetation
is different color from sand,
forest is different colors from
pasture or grass.
You will see a lot of things
there.  But now we want to put
stuff towards an audience.  You
want to make it usable.  You
want to make something -- I
have -- I have two approaches
here.  One is more like you want
to put stuff on the web.
Well, you have HTML, you have
modern HTML, and all these
things that you probably know a
lot better than I do.  But what
you can do is, for example, I
have pictures of my fire that I
had earlier.  Now I have a
before, a during, and an after
picture.  I did what I did
before here, I took this.  This
is the during picture.  And I
have a before and an after.  And
I combined them using nothing
more fancy than -- well, I
formed them into PNGs and then
I combined them into one using
image magic.  And then with HTML
five I can do a key frame
animation to show the before,
during, and after.  Just to make
change visible.
So change depiction is a really
great thing.  And one way of
very simply doing this is this.
There are more complex ones.
Obviously.  You have a very
large number of libraries that
use before/after sliders.  And
here I do have -- try to get it.
So this was a situation where we
had a flood.  The Yukon River
changes, it's cold.  And we have
a time that's called the iceout
or snow melt.  The iceout leads
to horrible ice jams and can
lead to horrible flooding.  And
here in 2012, the town of
Galena, a completely normal
situation in 2012 was the victim
of a flood because of an ice
jam.  You can slide over and
make visible how much flooding
there was a year later.  That
was 2013.  Yes, 2013 happened.
So as you can see, this scale
here, these were made by the
observatory.  So this is 10
kilometers, six miles of water.
It was pretty much wiped out,
it's a small town.  And people
were flown out.  One thing you
don't see are roads.  You travel
by the river or by train here.
So this is an example of what
you want to use.
Or, of course, the example I had
earlier.  Go a little bit
back -- my leaflet map.  As you
see, this is nothing more than a
regular map made with leaflet.
The library, I could use open as
well.  And GDAL has a helper
that will make tiles.
It's one command line, one line,
GL to tiles.  I get tiles.  And
I just have to figure out how to
get them into leaflet and I can
use all the tools I have from
leaflet.  Including the thing
here -- I could make the roads
visible.  So as you can see, you
can make a normal web map like
this with the before and the
after slide like earlier.  So
this is one thing I would like
to put towards you today with
satellite maps.
But not everybody wants to do
all that much -- well, this is
the recalculation.  Satellite
mapping with HTML5/CSS,
JavaScript, use tiles to
generate tiles, leaflet or
OpenLayer, ImageMagic to
manipulate, or the plugins to
make sliders.  And the images
there.  And as long as you have
preserved the projection and the
geoinformation before you ended
up going through the PNG images,
you have perfectly aligned
images.
And even over the processing of
these agencies is so good, that
even if you compare something in
the 1970s to now, they
overlap.  '87, and 2015, 2013,
25 years in between.  And I had
the perfect overlap.  So this
was really easy and not -- and
quite gratifying.
So things that I, however, do
more often is to analyze the
data a little bit more.  To get
them inside some software.
Inside a script.  Manipulate
them.  And then use libraries in
the script to plot them on maps
or not on maps or whenever I
want them.  Maybe to animate
them.  Maybe movies out of them.
So the toolkit for this one, I
call it toolkit 2B, is a little
bit ready.  And you can do it in
Python, R, whatever you like.
You use Numpy, because then you
have rasters, Matplotlib for
plotting, Basemap, GDAL, and to
make movies -- I want to show an
example of what I did.  Some
example of what I do.  And the
example has a little bit of
code.
So an example of what I do with
the code right now is something
called the burn index, or
actually the differential
normalized index.  You take a
before and after image and look
what is on freshly burned soil.
So you maybe need an intern who
knows a little bit about that.
But we teach the introductory
for that.  The burn index,
before and after, if I compare
it.  In brown, the fire earlier,
the most severely burned places.
Then I also have low-resolution
data that I personally
transformed into a GIS polygon
data set.  But you could get
this from somewhere else, or
fire detections, where was fire
detected by satellites that fly
over more often but with a lower
resolution.
So I can overlay those with
Python.  And plot them.  And the
more red things are more
defection texts, and where is
there more burning.  And this is
an example.  Maybe something
entirely different.  Maybe you
have demographic data to overlay
over a map and see, for example,
how does a demographic makeup of
my city coincide with green
spaces?  To detect the green
spaces, they have demographic
data in polygon.
And now for my other -- my work
example.  There is something I
really have a very fondness for.
It's the National Snow and Ice
Datacenter.  They are doing the
best job I have seen for
distributing data.  They have
good documentation that's
readable that tells you in words
you can understand, you know,
what does a pixel mean?
So they deal with many data
sets.  This is the one I have
the page here, sea ice
concentration from some
satellite or another.  Which
happens to be someone that looks
at microwave radiation coming up
from the earth.  And microwave
radiation shows you about cold
things.  Microwave radiation is
relatively cold compared to
light and the infrared.
So we have ice in the north.
And it's shrinking.  So they
have the best data set about the
ice concentration around the
north pole.  And if I take one
of these images I have this.  So
the concentration goes up to
100%.  I don't have anything
right at the pole, which is
typical for a polar orbiting
satellite.  Because it actually
orbits slightly next to the
pole, or around the pole.
And we have sea ice all the way
along Greenland, the Canadian
coast, and to Alaska.  And this
is some that I forgot.  So if I
want to combine a lot of
visualizations, what do I need
to do?  I need to open this in
Python.  I need to put in numpy,
manipulating, and I showed with
pygaarst, you can do the same,
maybe with a few more lines.  I
have to say raster, GeoTIFF of
my finding.  And I have the data
property that has the data in
it.  In this case, I have to
divide it by 2.5.  250 data
value is 100%.  I have to
normalize it 2%.  And then I can
do a little bit about where is
my -- where should my center be?
I don't want to see the whole
north pole.  I have a particular
area I'm interested in.  This is
north of the Aleutian Islands.
I get the latitude and
longitude.  And I can transfer
them within the coordinate
system of my data.  And I come
to a few tests about which I, J
coordinate of my raster
corresponds to my X, Y,
coordinate of my projected data.
And then -- there we go.
I can use the base map tool kit.
And you may not be familiar with
this syntax, but you have
probably seen similar things.
Even if you never used this one,
you define a map with some
variables in there.  You give it
a latitude and longitude of the
center.  And okay, maybe there's
a scatterplot in there, see what
it's for.  Give me coastlines,
give me rivers.  And then
putting it all together, you get
a lot of data for each scene.
And then I make a movie out of
it.  And here is the coast of
Alaska.  I happened to be in the
interested in the yellow, which
are the Islands, someone I know
was doing research on foxes out
there.  He wanted to know how
much sea ice was out there.  So
I made a video for him.  Sea ice
doesn't usually reach those
islands.  Saint George and Saint
Paul.  But you can see how it
develops and retreats, et
cetera.  So this was not very
much lines of code to get to a
really nice thing.
And with this observation I'm
drawing sort of to the end of my
talk.  I hope I have been giving
you something to think about.
And some -- some inspiration,
maybe, to take the problems that
you have and people you work
with have and think about not
just, is there a government
agency or a business or a
citizen science outfit or a
censor out there that would give
me some point data?  But maybe
is there a satellite that was up
there in space looking down on
us that would give me some
images that I could use to do
something with it?  And then
combine it and match it up.  I
think that has become a little
bit old fashioned.  It just came
to me, it's kind of a mashup of
things.  People specialize in
one or the other, right?  So
thank you very much for your
attention.  I believe we have
some time for questions, right?

