>> What an awesome day we're
having.  Thank you so much for
the organizers for bringing us
together today and for you for
coming.  I'm Zan Armstrong, and
excited to talk about why
Everything is Seasonal.  And
when I say everything is
seasonal, I mean, not quite
everything.  Everything related
to change over time.  But that's
a lot of things.  Consider so
many of the dash boards you have
made, seen, or been recruited to
make.  Consider all of the times
that you want to know if metric
is going up or down, or if some
event had an impact.
My main point today, if your
data includes any sort of change
over time, you should take
seasonality into account.
I want to start by telling a
story.  Imagine that it's summer
and you just got a new job.
You're so psyched.  The only
down side, there's a commute.
But it really doesn't seem so
bad.  And at first, it's not.
Fast forward a few months to
early move, and this is your
life.  A world filled with red
taillights, misery, road rage.
How could traffic have gotten so
much worse so quickly?
Is it going to go on like this
forever?  Maybe.  Maybe.  Or
maybe it's just November.
Consider that the number of
commuters influences the amount
of traffic there is.  So if
everybody takes a one week
summer vacation during the ten
weeks of summer, and almost
nobody takes a vacation early
November, right before the
holidays, 10% fewer commuters
per week on the road.  So the
goal of the story is to put you
in the mind set of seasonality,
and to cover this fact, that the
seasonality of causal factors
could matter.  And six ways to
think about seasonality and
different ways it could trip you
up.  Not just about traffic, but
the factors that contribute to
the traffic, the number of
commuters, and the percent of
people on vacation at any given
time.
But first, talk about what is
seasonality?  Seasonality are
patterns that repeat over known
fixed periods of time.  And the
most obvious of these of course
are the seasons.  And of course
also the time of day.
In San Francisco other people
say don't have seasons.  Looking
at this the two years of data, we
actually do.  Look at that.  Two
years of repeated patterns.  We
have seasons.
But perhaps the more obvious
type of season that we have is
our famous fog.  Zoom in to look
at our weather data at a three
month interval, you can see the
hourly data peaks and see the
years, sorry, the days, standing
out.  You get a good portion of
our annual temperature variation
every single day.
But it's not just about weather
or seasonality and time series
that aren't growing and
shrinking.
While we're familiar with the
temperature seasonalities in our
hometown, there are more factors
that have even more predictable
patterns.  In Hawaii, they have
been measuring parts per million
in fact atmosphere since the
early 1970s.  Here is that
data.  Along the F-axis, every
day from late 1974 to the end of
the 2014.  And we have the CO2
parts per million.  Two things
jump out, of course the increase
over time that we have been
seeing throughout this time
period, and the repeating annual
increase and decrease we have
had year in and year out.
There's a strong seasonality to
the CO2 in our atmosphere.
Let's talk about a third type of
data, births.  Something that we
don't of as having seasonality.
Babies come in the middle of the
night, come after two hours of
labor and come after 20.  Right?
In fact, baby data actually
illustrates three type of
seasonality, day of the week,
week of year, and hour of day.
So let's take a look at the
data.
Here we have the number of
babies born in the United States
from 1969 to 1988.  Every single
day.  And it's kind of a mess.
So let's zoom in and see what we
can find.  We will look at 1985,
some of you might be represented
in this data set.  But we start
to see there's some sort of
repeating pattern here.  Zoom
into the summer.  And we start
to see every -- there's these
weekend dips, and in between is
higher.  Weekend, weekend,
weekend.
And you might notice that one of
these weeks was a little bit
different than the rest.  This
one right here.  The first week
of July.  July 4th.  That's a
lot more like a weekend than a
weekday.  So now we can zoom
back out to our full data set of
this period.  And you we've
aggregated by week.  We
recognize the day of the week
and aggregate by week.  And a
second pattern starts to emerge.
We can zoom in on the last four
years of this time period and
see a repeating pattern over a
fixed period.  Up from the early
part of the year to December,
and then a decline.  Up,
decline.  And that repeats.  So
in addition to having a strong
day of the week seasonality, we
see a week of the year pattern
as well.
Now let's look at the minutes of
the day.  This is a different
data set.  This is babies born
in 2014.  Based on what minute
they were born.  So everybody
single point on this data set is
the number of babies born at a
maritime on a Saturday.  So
there were 384 babies born in
2014 at 9:31 a.m. on Saturdays.
And we go to the Saturday data,
see the partner, there's an
increase in the morning.
There's some pattern there.
Let's look at another day, just
for fun.  How about Mondays?
Same, right?  Totally the same.
Let's look at all seven days.
We have Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, Thursday, Friday in
the brown, and Saturday and
Sunday in the blue.  This is
babies being born.  Totally a
natural process.  What peaks at
8:00 in the morning on weekdays,
12:41 a.m., and right before the
end of the workday.  I was going
to stop here.  But I thought you
might want to explore a little
bit more.  Let's look at two of
the ways we can influence when a
baby is born.  C-sections and
inductions.  Babies born by
C-section.  Not that many in the
middle of the night.  A lot of 8
p.m.
Babies born that were induced.
Not that many in the morning, a
lot more in that noon to 6 p.m.
period.  And neither C-section
nor induced.  So we still have a
hour, minute of day, a subtle
pattern here that doesn't vary
by day of week.
So this baby data set
illustrate -- these baby data
sets illustrated three types of
seasonality I wanted to discuss
today.  Day of the week, week of
the year, and minute and hour of
day.
And, of course, two of these are
very much natural cycles that
our human behavior is closely
tied to.  And day of the week is
a human construct we have made
up, but it drives so much of our
collective behavior.
You might be wondering what
about monthly?  It's super
common to see data aggregated to
the month.  So many of the data
sets are published at that
level.  And I want to talk about
why that not be such a good
idea.  So let's say that I own a
restaurant.  It's a great little
neighborhood place.  People love
it when I open up the outdoor
seating in the summer.  Friday
and Saturday nights are popular,
and my famous weekend brunch
with mimosas.  And I'm closed on
Mondays, got to do data
visualization sometime.  So
let's make up data for the
hypothetical awesome restaurant.
$4,000, a day, it's a boring
line chart.  All the way across
from 2014 to now.  And build on
the growth.  Inflation to deal
with.  Maybe a little bit more
popular.  So we'll bring in 1.6%
year over year growth.  So I add
a little bit of slant to that
line.  Bring in some real
numbers here.  Might be
interested to see me compare
January 10th so January
11th, I want to compare
Fridays and Fridays.  It is not
so much important now, but more
important with more patterns.
And now growth chart, daily,
year, growth.  And 1.6% every
single day.  Very nice and
steady bar chart.
So let's bring in some week of
the year seasonality.  I opened
up my patio in the summer.  When
I have more seating, more money,
less seating, less money.  A
little under 4,000 in the winter
days, a little more than 4,000
when I open the patio.  It's
still boring, it's 1.6%.  We're
comparing summer to summer and
winter to winter.  And assuming
I open up my patio on the same
appropriate day.
And let's bring in some day of
the week seasonality.  And here
we go, it's kind of a mess.  So
let's drill in to see what's
there.  As I mentioned on
Mondays, I'm closed due to my
data visualizations.  And I have
the big weekends, a big Friday
dinner.  Saturday brunch,
Saturday dinner, and a big
Sunday brunch with mimosas.
Zoom out to daily revenue, still
boring, apples to apples.  And I
have baseline revenue, the
growth, two types of seasonal
patterns that seem quite
plausible.  Aggregate by week.
What does this look like?
Almost the same.  A little bit
of an angle.  Sometimes before
and after I open up the patio.
Weekly growth, boring.
Comparing to the previous year.
And back week to week.
And if I add a 5% bump in March
and April, see that in the
chart, stands out clearly.
Let's aggregate now by month.
Here's our nice, clean data set.
We can still see some of the
signal.  The summer is a little
bit bigger.  And the winter's a
little bit smaller.  But it
looks like there's so much going
on here.  And especially when we
bring in those growth metrics,
it looks like there's a lot
happening.  A lot of variation
in the data set from
month-to-month.  Some months,
negative 5% growth.  Other
months, almost 10% positive
growth.  There's a lot going on.
If we wanted to find a real
signal, it looks like -- how
could we even see it?  Could we
see a 5% change?  Point to these
and say that's a weird change.
Something happens with the
business, we need to be worried
or excited?
>> So what's going on.  Of
course we have a factor, months
have a different number of days.
But a different set number of
days per year.  In 2016, four
weeks, and two bonus days to get
to April.  And those were a
Tuesday and a Wednesday in 2014.
2015, we have 365 days in a
year, one more than a factor of
seven.  We shift the month one
day forward in the week.  Now
two bonus days that don't fall
into a happy week are a
Wednesday and a Thursday.
Effectively we have a Wednesday
and Thursday, the previous year
we had a Tuesday and a
Wednesday.
April 2016 is particularly
interesting.  Now we're on a
leap year.  We move forward two
days and it just so happens when
we move forward two days we fall
into the weekend.  Okay?  Those
big extra revenue days.  So in
April 2016, it's going to have
more money in it just because
the days of the week that are
bonus are making more money.
Doesn't mean I did better in
April 2016 than in April 2015.
I just get five weekends to
count instead of four.
And I think it's easy, that's
true.  How much of an effect
could that?  Changed the data
from one that's easy to read,
easily see the change, to one
where there's so much more
happening and nothing really is.
This is a really simple time
series.  Growth, consistent day
of the week pattern, consistent
week of year.  No random
variation.  No variation due to
weather.
No holidays, no decreases due to
a bad review, no short or
long-term variation due to
marketing campaigns, good press,
or a new chef.  No change in
trend, day or week of year
seasonality.  And yet we look
like there was so much going on
in the monthly data.  It would
have hidden if there was a true
signal that we needed to make
decisions about, would have been
hidden unless we're doing more
than a 2% change to get a signal
that you could see is huge.
So monthly aggregation is
inherently a bad idea unless the
data is monthly.  If I was
analyzing rent checks, a land
owner with a lot of rent.  I
don't care if they pay on the
29th, 30th, 31st.  I might
care if they pay me or not in
that month.  In that case, a
month is appropriate.  But our
behavior is so much more tied to
day of week than to month of
year.
That in most cases I would look
to day of week first and
aggregating by weeks instead of
months.  But the main point,
aggregate time periods that make
sense for your data.  We saw
that daily data can be hard to
interpret, and year over year
growth of minus 364 days, that's
only there.  But then 365 or
366, that compares weekends to
weekdays and an impossible chart
to read.  But major tools,
Google analytics compare
previous years by comparing the
calendar year.  Presumably
that's what people expect.
The good news is you can change
it right in the tool in this
case.
So in general, compare apples to
apples.  Can compare 364 back.
Seasonality is the story we
sometimes actually want to tell,
where the most important insight
is, the seed, the kernel you're
looking for is.  To save lives.
That's with the baby data set.
Looking at the minute of the day
by day of the week was
informative.  We learned
something and saw something new
that we wouldn't have seen if we
looked at the total number of
babies per day.  This is true on
a 1985 study on deaths by
tractor accident that a nursing
friend told me.  It's still told
today to tell about the
potential impact of seasonality
data and you can actually save
lives if you put the data at
this granularity.  And the study
was looking at tractor accidents
in Georgia, fatalities, month,
location, hour, and age.  And in
month you can see there's two
main peaks, during the planting
and harvesting season, there's
more tractor usage.  And the
deaths per hour.  A few stand
out.  The 11 a.m. to noon, right
before lunch.  Higher values in
the afternoon than in the
morning, and that 4 p.m. to 5
p.m. peak.  And knowing this can
change the recommendation that
people made about when you use
your tractors and various safety
recommendations and actually
save lives.
The point I want to talk about
next is to the duality by
looking at the impact, or trying
to do causal analysis as close
as you can.  Things that are
expected, holidays, sales,
events.  Things unexpected, but
common, weather.  Natural
disasters, death of a CEO,
mergers.  And we often want to
know what the effect is, short
or long-term.
Let's look at some data.  In
September 2011 the month of
9/11, gun sales increased by 28%
compared to the previous -- to
the August, the month before.
And I told you not to use
monthly data, I'm using monthly
data.  Sometimes it's the best
you have available.  Hopefully
you can check and see if day of
the week is important.  The
restaurant business typically
exacerbates that.  But we'll do
months because it's what we've
got.
January 2015, Obama's second
inauguration, the month after
Sandy Hook, dropped by 10%.  And
nothing special happened, they
increased by 21% from the
previous month.  See the time
series.  Here are the three
points plotted on the time
series.  And we can there is
annual pattern we can recognize.
We don't know, just by looking
at the previous month, hard to
tell if it's a true impact or
based on seasonality, a
variation.  Look at this, and we
know we should deal with
seasonality, what can we do?
What we can do is what New York
times did.  And this came from
Josh Keller, and this amazing
analysis, they created the data
set on federal background
checks.  They started with this
view which is what we were just
look at with a lot more
annotation.
And then they showed you the
de-sensationalization of it.
Here's the seasonality, and
after you calculate and remove
the seasonality from the data
set.  It's so much more clear
you can see the overall trend or
time and these big points of
unusual gun sales.
One of the best parts was not
only did they do an amazing,
fantastic article.  And I
encourage you to read this, the
rest of the article is also
great.  But they also have a
blog driven by data, he posted
his analysis, and including the
link to GitHub, I could see what
he was using, he was using the
arena method, a great method in
the seasonal package.  Yay.  Go
check it out.
But -- so they used that method.
If you're reacting for
seasonality, it's year and year
growth.  It's great to see is
this year different than last
year?  If you want to isolate
it, you can use decomposing with
STL, or de-seasonallizing with
census X.  And then you can
mimic an A/B test that never
existed, and there's
documentation that I'll post at
the end of the talk.
So what we're going to talk
about today is decomposing with
STL.  A three-part
decomposition.  It's additive.
If you want to do an analysis,
look at both methods and decide
what makes most sense.  There's
a lot of parameter choices with
these methods as well.  So
there's three parts.  Here's our
time series, and the other
three, the long-term trend, the
annual seasonality and the
remainder.  So this is an
additive method, you can add
them together, and add the
values in a column, you get the
original time series.  Don't
necessarily want additive
series, but it's a nice place to
start.
And long-term trend, eyeball it,
decline, increase, and steeper
increase, and we can do it with
math.  And we can see the purple
long-term trend overlaid on the
original graph as well as
removing the trend and seeing
what's left.  And looking at a
long-term trend, it lets us ask
questions.  How have gun sales
changed over the last 15 years
in general?
And look at month seasonality,
and to isolate this, I block out
the charts.  You can focus on
the even years so you can see --
sorry.  See what's going on.
And overlaid all 15 year on a
single chart.  The lighter green
is older, and the darker green
is newer.  So it's been a little
bit of seasonal drift.  We can
see it higher February, March,
lower June, July, and increasing
into the end of the year.
And increasing at the top, this
allows some drift in the
seasonality over time and we can
see there's actually the
component is changing.  A second
peak.  That might be an
interesting question to ask.
Why is the seasonality of gun
sales changing?  Are there
different types of sales at
different types of year?  What's
going on?  And see it without
seasonality, Akin to what they
did in the New York Times and
lets you see the trend without
the extra layer.  Both with the
seasonality and without the
seasonality are interesting.
And asks questions, during the
months the most were sold and
the changes.
We can eyeball these, this looks
funny, so does that, that was
funny.  And again in the end of
2016, that looks pretty funny.
But it helps when we can isolate
it mathematically and see the
time series without the
remainder and see the entitles
isolated and see how big they
were.
And if you're doing forecasting,
you want to forecast without the
remainder, without the long-term
trend and the seasonality.
These are unpredictable events,
presumably.  So you want to see
them on a baseline.
And this is to ask questions,
when did gun sales spike and by
how much?  Never dipping, all of
the one-off events are spikes.
You can see it overlaid in the
original and see that January is
part of a two month spike, three
month.  And the other was a
smaller spike.  It's much
smaller compared to more recent
disruptions.  And February 2011
was just life as usual.
Here's those decomposed time
series one more time.  So the
next point I want to discuss,
the seasonality that matters
most might be a subset of your
data.  And this is going to be
left as a challenge for the
audience.  So over beers tonight
I challenge you to describe a
scenario in which ignoring the
seasonality of a subset of the
data will lead to
misinterpreting the aggregate
data.  But I will give you a
hint or two.
So consider what if your subsets
had different seasonalities?
What if they had different
growth rates?  Hint number two
for those of you interested in
principal component analysis,
what if there's different
seasonality in the components?
How does that affect your
analysis?
Last but not least, people and
places are different, so are
their seasonal ties.  So many of
these patterns are
super-ingrained, it's easy to
take them for granted or assume
our seasonality patterns are
shared by everybody around us.
But people are in different
places, ages, cultures,
different interests.  And all of
these things might affect their
behavior or the behavior in
their data.  Are they the same
as you or using the product in a
different way?  The people that
you're analyzing, trying to
understand, or the nature that
you're analyzing?  Trying to
understand them.  You have to
look at the data in the
granularity.
And fortunately that's
wonderful.
Our lives are so full of the
patterns.  I get to show eye
candy and a call of action to
you.  I ask you to look although
the data, dive deeper, don't
aggregate it away, see what the
data weeks look like, the
minutes of the hour, the weeks
of the year?  Are there patterns
that make you connect better
with the data that you're
looking at?  Things that you can
show and reveal and share?
And these -- so there's a lot of
obviously really pretty things
done throughout the web.  One is
why people visit the emergency
room by Nathan Yau.  He took an
amazing data set of number of ER
visits associated with common
products.  Like footballs.
There's more during football
season in the fall.  And nails,
screws, tacks, and bolts.  More
in the summer.  Presumably
people are doing more house work
then.
But ask you what's the
seasonality of nails, screws,
tacks and bolts, would you have
known?  These things don't have
to be line charts.  I have used
them as a good place to start
and an illustration.  But
there's a lot of ways to explore
and engage with and play with
seasonal data.
Flickr flow by Martin Wattenberg
and Fernanda Viegas, opened up
the conference this morning.
The beautiful Flickr flow.  I
have a project, weather circles,
plays with animating weather at
different hours of day,
different months of the year for
different cities.  This is
looking at cloud data in San
Diego.  Percent cloudiness
during the day.
Based in Boston, the MBTA data,
the Boston subway system.  It's
a wonderful project.  Just one
of many charts they have made
looking at the various
seasonalities and patterns
around how people get around
Boston.
A similar project in Ville
Vivante, a similar data set, how
people are moving think Geneva
and when they do, kind of how
active the city is.  Traffic
accidents data by Nadieh who
spoke earlier today, looking at
the patterns there.  And it
doesn't even have to be a chart
at all.  From Giorgia and
Stephanie's postcard project you
might have seen, these are all
the doors that Giorgia opened in
a week.
The first three she opens into
work on Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday.
So in summation, as you go home,
my real hope is you're going to
spend the next week looking and
you and all the time think that
the world is seasonal.  Number
one, consider the seasonality of
common factors.  Number two,
aggregate the time period that
makes sense for the data.  If
you don't know, look at it.
Number three, sometimes
seasonality is the story.  Don't
always aggregate it away or
de-seasonallize it.  Sometimes
it's the crux of the story,
might be the most beautiful
rendering or insight.  Number
four, adjust for seasonality
when adjusting impact for an
event with cause analysis.
Number five, the seasonality
that matters might be in a
subset of your data.  I'm
looking forward to talking about
this tonight for anybody with a
scenario.  And number six,
seasonal patterns vary by place,
culture, and lifestyle.  It's an
amazing way to understand the
people and culture and nature
around us.  So go and enjoy and
explore and send your
visualizations.  If you would
like more info, I have my GitHub
repo.  Things here that didn't
make it into the final cut.
This is just the tip of the
iceberg.  So much more.  So if
your data increase any sort of
change over time, take
seasonality into account.
