>> Thank you.  I'm not on.
>> So.  So correct me if I'm
wrong, but I heard you like
graphs.
>> Yes.
>> Well, have I got a graph for
you.  So here's a completely
made up graph.  Based off an
unscientific survey of two
anecdotes.  How informed we are
versus how much information we
have.  And obviously the more
information we have, the less
informed we are.  Because now
there's too much noise, not
enough signal, too much
haystack, not enough needles.
What really matters.  And
another graph, how connected we
are versus how much information
we have.  And obviously the more
information we have, the less
connected we are.  On the
Internet and the media, you can
find the information to confirm
your biases and beliefs.  More
information is making us more
polarized.
Here's another graph.  How
empowered we are versus -- let
me just get to the punchline.
The more you learn, the more
it's off-limit and out of your
control.  You can't do anything
about it.  That sucks.  So I
heard you like graphs and
visualizations.  I think we're
all here because we want to make
things and graphics.  And it
really helps you give
information.
We to want make things that help
people be more informed, more
connected.  More empowered.
But if just putting more and
more information out there
accomplishes the complete
opposite of all that, then I
guess for us media makers and
journalists in this new age, the
question is not, can our field
survive?  But does our field
deserve to survive?
And that is the existential
crisis.

but, yeah, seriously.  It is a
big problem.  But to be fair,
database I think solves half of
that.  Because data
visualization let's us go from
the individual stories to the
larger patterns.  But I think
now we need to go deeper because
what's under those stories are
patterns, what's under those
patterns are systems.
Water break one.  So the problem
is we have too much information
and not enough understanding.
Patterns can show us how things
happen, but not really why
things happen.  And for a deeper
understand we need systems.
So we kind of know already what
dataviz looks like, what would
System (VIS) look like?  One
tool that might be useful, not
the only tool, is simulation.
So here's a prototype -- not a
prototype, a product I
launched -- for once, simulating
in emoji.  At the end I will
have links to the slide and re
resources and projects.
So the reader could play with
the simulations, and the emoji,
and mess around with the rules
and create their own
simulations.  And these
simulations were used to explain
systems.  Systems like
ecosystems.  And why forest
fires are actually good for the
forest.
Or systems of epidemiology, how
disease spreads, what is heard
and why is it important?  And
civil conflict.

and how much like a forest fire,
or much like disease, how
violence can spread across a
population.
Now -- yes.  This emoji is not
going to be very complicated.
They're obviously very
simplified.  But that's not a
bug.  That's a feature.  So
think about this street map.  A
street map is -- is useful not
despite being simplified, but
because it's simplified.  It
cuts away what doesn't matter to
just leave what does.
That's the issue.  A lot of
things in our media stuff
doesn't matter.  Or at least it
gives the false impression.  A
concrete example, turn on your
cable news and you'll see some
gnarly, nasty, gruesome crime
story.  And you'll probably see
it like twice a day or more.
Probably -- yeah, definitely a
lot more.
And you might get the
impression -- and the public
opinion in the U.S. right now --
is that the world and the U.S.
is getting more dangerous.  But
if you're to look at -- beyond
the things and look at the
trends, the U.S. crime rate has
been actually dropping since the
1980s across all categories.
But the trends only tell you
that it's dropping.  It doesn't
tell you why.
And for that you need to go down
beyond the things and the trends
to the fear.  Sociology,
criminology, psychology,
economics, so on and so forth.
And only once you have theory,
can you create a more humanized
justice system.  Theories let us
create the future.
That's why we have to go deeper,
as the inception person says, go
deeper.  Can we go even deeper
than theory?  I think, yes.
There is something fundamental
and underlies all theory.  Other
than you know philosophy and
math and logic and language and
the scientific method itself,
there is also systems.  Systems
thinking.  What is systems
thinking?
Actually to be honest, the
systems thinking community
doesn't know what systems
thinking really is.  It's
very -- again, I think it might
be a feature, maybe.  It's very
interdisciplinary.  It's kind of
broad and a little bit fuzzy in
places.  But at its core, this
is what system thinking is.
So in our day-to-day lives, we
think of cause and effect in a
linear fashion.  A affects B
affects C and so on.  But the
world's not linear, it's loopy,
according to the thinking.
Where A can affect B and B
affects A, vicious cycles, arms
races, escalation of violation,
and kindness with more kindness,
a positive example.  And
stabilizing loops.  The next
time you think of a cause and
affect, don't just think of how
A can affect B, but B can
directly or indirectly fax A.
It's not linear, it's loopy.
That's the thinking.
So I want to tell a story, start
with the story, the human story,
the human elements that really
matter.  But go beyond the thing
and go for the system.  Because
only once we have a deep
understanding of the underlying
systems that we can really go
where we want to go.
Okay.  Still on.  Just making
sure.  Water break two.  The
sequel.
So -- but even if we're
informed, we can have polarized
echo chambers.  How do we
overcome that?  People have
contradicting viewpoints, or
seemingly contradicting
viewpoints.  I'm going to show a
simulation I made a year and a
half ago.  It's a good example
of how system thinking can
combine.  It's the one hit
wonder.  Parable of the polygons
is an explorable about
discrimination and diversity.
Racism and is polarizing,
especially on the Internet.  To
say the least.  But there's more
than two.
Like one person could say, well,
look at the racial ratio in our
incarceration system and
obviously on the societal level,
there's a huge discrimination.
But on an individual level, a
lot of people say I'm not
racist, none of my friends are,
and society has a huge taboo
against it.  Even if you are a
little bit biased, how can it be
that bad?  Parable polygons show
how a small bias can accumulate
through a vicious cycle into a
large societal discrimination.
So -- and I'll just play through
it.  And I play through it, I
mean pre-recorded video.  So you
can drag around shapes.  And so
each shape -- so you can only
move the unhappy shapes.  And
shapes are unhappy -- fine.
Just moving without me.  Every
shape has a rule.  An individual
rule.  I want to move if less
than a third of my neighbors are
like me.  The triangle is
unhappy, less of the neighbors
are like it, one out of six, and
then two out of six, and the
right most one, it's meh,
totally full of its own peeps.
So keep in mind, look at the
middle section, every shape is
okay being in the minority in
their own local neighborhood.
So it's a very small bias.
Every one would be okay being a
minority.  And yet -- and yet in
a larger society -- so right now
I'm just moving around the
unhappy shapes randomly.  Not
really thinking.  Just moving
them into a happy spot, not
really thinking where they're
going.  But that small,
individual bias accumulates.  It
cascades.  Because once someone
moves out of their neighborhood,
that neighborhood changes.  And
so more people move out of that
neighborhood.  And eventually
you get something like this.
Where it started off like
totally randomly mixed, and now
there's definitely blue section
and yellow sections and this is
a square town, this is triangle
town.  Wow.
What is up with that?  So, yeah.
A vicious cycle.  Or loop.  And
that's how you can combine that
contradiction.  Where someone
could reasonably say there's
discrimination on a societal
level, and why someone could
reasonably say that for
individuals, it might not be
that much.  I just want to
emphasize this is -- I'm not
saying this is how it always
works.  Like there are some very
top-down discriminatory cases.
But I think for at least
bottom-up cases, this is how --
this is a plausible mechanism
for how this kind of
discrimination can arise from
the bottom up.
Another thing to emphasize is
that it's not just presenting
both sides.  Instead of --
because, you know, just do that,
and the confirmation bias,
people pick the side they
already believe in.  What you do
instead is to combine those
sides.  Not just merely -- show
that they can be both part of
the same thing.
Let's talk about conflict.  I
like this illustration of
conflict.  It's a good
illustration.  I worked for days
on this.  It's my masterpiece.
So the mediators are actually
using systems thinking to help
people resolve conflicts.  So
here we have like a little toy
example of a very basic
conflict.  One person would have
a linear cause and effect story
they would have.  Attack us and
fight back and then the story,
they attacked us, fighting back.
The world's not linear, it's
loopy.  Yeah.  And in this case
it's a pretty common pattern,
the vicious cycle, arms race,
escalation of violence.  So the
common mediator shows it to all
the parties involved that the
system is their common enemy,
not each other.
And maybe once they realize that
the system is their common
enemy, maybe they can work
together.  At least that's the
hope.
This is the part where I drop
the word empathy.  And I'm going
to say it, I really like
empathy.  I've made stories and
games for empathy.  Kind of a
buzz word nowadays.  Not like
synergy bad.  But kind of
getting -- where gamification
is, that's where empathy kind of
is.
I can see it now, Nicky hates
empathy.  Thank you.  But,
really.  Like -- yeah.  With
individuals, it's important.
But here's the thing about
systems.  Individual -- I mean,
they matter, but not as much as
the system itself.
So the empathy is too
individual.  You have to start
with the individual, but you
have to look at the system.  So
if information is making us feel
more polarized, more
disconnected, then what systems
thinking tells us, we're all
connected whether or not we like
it, even if they're not healthy.
A lot of time they're not
healthy.  But in any case, the
system is our common enemy, not
the individuals.
Water break three.  From the
creators of water break one and
water break two.
So even if we're informed and
connected against those in
power, you can say, well, now I
am very informed about the
system and I know we're all in
this together.  And we're
trapped.  This sucked.  What can
we do?
And I don't know.  I really
hoped I would be able to figure
this out by the time I was
scheduled to give this talk.
But given I have been dealing
with political problems dealing
with this for millennia, this is
a thing we have to keep thinking
about forever.
How can people like average --
you know, they're average
citizens, feel empowered.  Or
actually make a change?
Still -- I think I have like
partial, half-baked ideas that
I'll show off in this prototype.
Which is not out.  And also,
yes, the UI is a little bit
bad.  But, yes, prototype.  It's
a presentation using a U.S.
statistic.  So it's got six
boxes and people move from box
to box.  So students at the top,
employed in the middle and
incarcerated at the bottom.
And so they move
probabilistically, and the
probabilities are based off
stats on race, age, education,
income, employment,
incarceration, at least for the
U.S.
And they move around
probabilistically based on those
stats, and you can also ask --
you can change those stats in
the side bar to ask what if --
what if fewer juveniles were
incarcerated?  What if
employment prospects were
better?  And each box is also
separated.  And each side bar is
separated by a box.  So you can
say like, if you're a small
business owner, you get the
little box where you control the
probabilities of who gets
employed.  Like do you want to
hire ex-cons?  Or how to
increase job prospects?  How
often do you have to fire or lay
people off?
So not only do you get to ask
what if, you can ask what can I,
or people like me, can do?  And
how can that affect the entire
system?
So here it is just running.
Simulations, probabilities using
the real stats from -- using
real stats.  And you can also
focus on individual's story.  So
you can click on someone and you
can see the individual story and
the system at the same time.
And so as it runs, you can also
think, oh, I'm a teacher.  What
if I helped people, more people
go to college.  I'm a small
business owner, what if I didn't
discriminate against ex-cons?
Or I'm a policy maker, get rid
of mandatory minimums, or at
least reduce them?  In a pro
prototype, you can't see how it
affects the entire system, but
the idea, hopefully once it's
done, what small change you can
do in your field and how that
ripples out throughout the
entire system.
So that's an idea for maybe how
system thinking can help us.
Give a thought of why people
might feel this?  And I'll say
it's like a pretty legitimate
reason.  I think it comes from
having a linear story.
Believing that power comes from
one party controlling another,
and crap runs downhill.  And
they are -- you know, at the
very top there's the
corporations, or the government,
and they control the media or
the middlemen, who control a
very easily-manipulated
majority.
And if you're not at the root
cause, and a linear cause and
effect story, there's only one
root cause.  If you're not the
root cause, if you're not at the
very top, then you have no power
and you can't really do
anything.  That's a very
disempowering story.  And idea.
But the world's not linear,
it's --
>> Loopy!
>> Yay, thank you.  And when the
world is loopy, there is no root
cause.  And that's great.  That
means any part of the system
where you are at -- you can
affect the feedback loops,
vicious cycles, stabilizing
loops -- your affects can ripple
throughout the system.  Just
like the polygons showed how
even a very small bias or effect
in a local neighborhood can
ripple out throughout the entire
world.  Maybe -- maybe that's
how system thinking can empower
us.  Maybe.
As a more concrete example, for
example, you're a small business
owner and you want to hire
ex-cons.  And it turns out that
it works pretty well, and your
peers, your network in your
business community also hires
ex-cons for themselves.  And --
but the ex-cons also have their
own network.  Their own friends.
Most of the people in poor,
disadvantaged neighborhoods,
communities of color.  And so
they reach out to their network
and it just keeps spreading and
public opinion shifts on race
and criminal justice.  And
public opinion then turns into
public pressure on politicians
to fix their stuff.
And that is a lot easier said
than done.  Again, these are
half-baked ideas.  I'm figuring
it out.  And I hope you'll join
me in figuring out systems
things and stuff like that.
As the old joke goes, you are
not stuck in traffic, you are
traffic.  And what systems
thinking tells us, we are not
trapped in the system, we are
the system.
Water break four.  Water break
origins: hydrate harder.
Anyway.  And that is how we can
use systems thinking to give us
a deeper understanding.  To
overcome polarization.  And
maybe, just maybe, we can change
the world.  So wut?  So wut?
Because I just gave you a whole
bunch of theory, and not a lot
is actually practical.
You might be saying, Nicky, I
have deadlines, I have to learn
D3, I'm only up to D2.  What
have you got for me?  Well, I'm
glad you asked, said
hypothetical person.  Here are
five tools I can give you on how
to tell stories about systems
and turn systems into stories.
And, again, all the links and
projects I will be referring to
will be posted at the end of
this slide talkie thing.
So five tools.  From least cray
cray to most cray cray to
implement.  And the first tool
is nothing.  Or at least nothing
new.  So, you know, you don't
have to change your work flow,
your tools.
Because people have been telling
stories about systems in all
kinds of media.  So three of my
favorite examples.  The Wire is
the quintessential example, the
cast, multiple perspectives.
And every season is showing a
different part of the system.  A
different part of the Baltimore
criminal justice system.
So, yeah.  If you make a video,
or, you know, film stuff.  Like
check out The Wire.  That's how
you look at systems.  And still
a great way to do story telling
in a non-linear way.  For those
who make infographic, I heard
you like graphs.  Chris Wear.
Check out the work of Chris Ware
and specifically the stories.
12 stories that can be read in
any order.  And each
installment, I guess, is so
non-linear.  Timelines
intersecting, all which way,
what.  That's how to do the
story telling in a visual
format.  The comics.  And there
is quote, unquote, post-modern
literature.  Like one of my
favorite books by Kurt Vonnegut.
Creates a character timeline to
timeline.  And another one I
read recently, Jennifer Egan's,
a Visit from the Goon Squad.
And boast of these post-modern
literatures are a way of doing
multiple perspectives and
non-linear story telling.
The point is you don't need
simulations or anything fancy to
tell stories about systems.
People have been doing it -- not
very common, actually pretty
rare, but it has been done.
Number two is the causal loop
diagram.  And I have been doing
this the entire talk.  So the
causal loop diagram -- so here
is my favorite example that I
found randomly through Google
image search.  So it's about the
war on drugs.
Specifically on focusing on
heroin.  And so I really like
this one because with just three
loops it tells three really deep
stories.  So the first causal
loop is about how if we seize
heroin, yes, it reduces it in
had the short run, but a
reduction in inventory, supply
and demand, reducing inventory,
drives up the price, drives up
price drives up profits, and
driving up the profit creates
the incentive to create more
heroin.  Second loop, if the
price goes up, addicts, they
demand it, they're addicted to
it.  They have to resort to
petty crime to, you know -- to
petty crime.  Results in
arrests.  So that's, you know,
our versioning incarceration
system.  And with the arresting
of addicts, the inventory goes
up.
And then the third group, there
is level over inventory, the
drug dealers have to market it,
so to speak, and bring in my new
addicts into the system.  So
three different stories.  This
is the content of three
documentaries captured in one
diagram.  I really like the
causal loop diagram.  But if you
do a Google image search on
this, they all look this bad.
Like apparently the systems
thinking community doesn't
realize there's more than one
font than times new Roman, and
more than one shade of blue, hex
code zero, zero, zero, XF.  And
if you want to use the causal
loop diagrams, make it better.
It's horrible.  Even though it's
powerful, oh, my eyes are
bleeding.
Tool number three.  Water break
five: water returns.
Stock and flow models.  So a
stock and flow -- imagine a
stock as a bathtub and, you
know, things flow in, things
flow out.  That's a stock and
flow model.  Kind of similar to
the causal loop diagram.  So
this one is the -- here's where
simulation comes in.  Stock and
flow models are specifically
created for simulation.  When I
was researching on stock and
flow models, it turns out the
earliest simulation was not done
on an electronic computer, it
was a water computer.  This is a
computer made of water.  What?
So instead of electricity
flowing through wires, we have
water flowing through pipes.
This was created in 1949 by a
New Zealand person to simulate
the economy.  One tank is the
treasury, money flows in, money
flows out.  And worked well
enough to get a place in a
museum.  So good for you.  1949
New Zealand person.
They use stock and flow models
today.  Scientists use it to
model greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere and more are going in
than coming out, obviously.  And
also simulating economies.
People use stock and flow for
that.  And also like modeling
disease.  Basically you can use
stock and flow simulations to
simulation anything where you
have a thing and things go into
the thing and things come out of
the thing.
It's pretty flexible as a tool.
And tool number four is
probability simulations.  And
this one's used already.  And
these are examples that a lot of
you might already know.  First
one is the comma, probably.
Where using the CDC data he
simulates people being born and
dying over and over again.  And
you get a nice little histogram
of death over there.  And I can
tell you how many years you have
left to live.  Probably.
The second one is -- the one
that actually really inspired my
prototype, the Marshall project,
FiveThirtyEight, made the
simulator.  You can choose at
what risk people get parole or
don't get parole.  And you can
make that tradeoff here for
yourself and see how it works
probabilistically.
The third one, with the goat and
the car, that's an infamous
mathematical paradox.  Created
by Victor Powell as an explainer
of the paradox.  And finally,
selection season.  Martin made
rock and pole.  Which -- great
title -- which shows off why a
2% chance -- a 2% difference in
the polling results isn't much
to analyze about, that is the
margin of error.  So made a
simulation explaining margin of
error.
And again, I will have a link to
all the links for all this

12:02:16
And at the very far theoretical
end we have agent-based
modeling.  Also similar.
Agent-based modeling.  So an
agent is a thing that makes
decisions.  And an agent-based
model is a whole bunch of
things, a whole bunch of agents
that make decisions based off of
others 'decisions.  So that's
like infinite feedback loops
there.  It's also loopy.
So, for example, a concrete
example, parable of the polygons
is -- I actually stole a model
created by Thomas Shelly.  He
created the original model.  We
just added cute shapes and
smiles to it to explain it in
such a cute way, segregation.
What a cute topic.
But you don't have to do just
grids.  You can also do a
network.  And -- yeah.  Grids
and networks, all that.  And the
CDC also used agent-based models
to simulate disease spread in
real time.  Simulations save
lives.  And now the theory and
the tools, I have a minute left.
How to Simulate the Universe, In
134 Easy Steps.  You need a
human hook.
If I go beyond that, and step
two, the trends, and step three,
go beyond that and find a
theory.  You don't need to be an
expert on everything, but just
learn enough to get to step
four.  Find the non-linear loopy
causes and effects.  The vicious
and virtuous cycles.  And then
if I can a tool that works for
you.  Once you have a prototype,
step six, it's iterate.  And
seven iterate, eight, iterate,
and keep doing this over and
over again until you have
something that informs people.
Something that connects people.
Something that really empowers
people.  And once you have
something that does all that,
134.  Ship it.  And then fix
bugs.  Thank you so much.  Link
is over there.

